saovmposing that cup of yours is now in my hands. How easy it is for me
to have it remoulded in the same moulds! and who will say you have not
the same cup resurrected from the grave?'

"Can you not understand," said Durant, "that this laborer was in
the same condition as the poor mortals who are in painful ignorance
of the way and means by which the resurrection will take place? And
yet how simple when once understood. The cup had been buried in that
world of liquid, it had dissolved and had been scattered throughout
the world in which it was buried, and to a person unacquainted with
the laws governing such things, was lost forever. If man, who is as
a babe compared with God in intelligence, could resurrect a cup from
that little world, do you not think it possible for God, who is the
fountain-head of intelligence and power, to restore your body after it
has been scattered through out this little world of ours? And as the
restoring of that cup appeared very simple to that laboring man, so I
believe the resurrection of the body will appear very simple to us when
we are on the other side, and fully understand the laws, methods and
powers which govern the restoration."

At this moment a Mr. Williams, who had been a very attentive listener
during the entire evening, arose and said: "Mr. Durant, to all
appearances you have proved every argument made with some quotation
from the Bible; your mode of reasoning appears very logical, but I have
here a passage which seems to conflict with the argument that baptism
is positively essential to salvation."

"If so," answered the Elder, "I will be pleased to listen. Really, if
you have found an argument, from the sayings of Christ or His apostles,
which promises salvation without baptism, you have certainly made a
great discovery."

"Well, I think the discovery has been made," answered Williams, "and
it seems strange that a gentleman who has made the Bible as much of a
study as you have, has never been able to comprehend it."

"Thanks, but now for the argument; do not build your hopes too high,
perhaps you misunderstand your own reading of the Sacred Record."

"Well, that remains to be seen. You have disclaimed all belief in
death-bed repentance bringing salvation, and you are, as well, a
disbeliever in salvation without baptism. Now to the law and the
testimony once more. Examine the account of the crucifixion, as
recorded in Luke 23rd chapter, beginning with the 39th verse. Christ
upon that occasion had a male factor on either side of Him; one railed
on Him saying, 'If though be Christ, save thyself and us,' while the
other, being filled with repentance and being converted, rebuked his
companion in sin and implored the blessed Redeemer: 'Lord remember me
when thou comest to thy kingdom.' Christ, witnessing the repentance of
this malefactor, even at the last moment of his life, presented him
with the gift of salvation before giving up the ghost: 'Verily I say
unto thee, today shalt thou be with me in paradise.' These were the
words used by the Captain of our salvation; the promise was granted
without baptism, and he was carried to heaven with our Savior; and
yet in the very face of this testimony you proclaim the doctrine that
without baptism salvation cannot be obtained."

"Christ did not offer that malefactor salvation on that occasion,
neither was he carried to heaven with the Redeemer. I desire to
convince you, Mr. Williams, if you will accept the statement in the
Bible, and I believe you will, that Christ did not go to His Father
until some time after this, and that the paradise referred to is not
the haven of salvation that we all hope to reach."

"Mr. Durant, if you convince me of this, I will have nothing more to
say," replied Mr. Williams.

"Very well, then, pay strict attention to the words you have just
quoted which contain the promise that in your opinion insures the
penitent malefactor entrance to the presence of the Father: 'Today
shalt thou be with me in paradise.' Three days after these words were
spoken, we discover Mary weeping as she bowed down at the sepulcher
where Christ's remains had been deposited, and upon recognizing her
Lord, who stood by her side and addressed her, she received this
command, 'Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.' Rather
a strange and startling declaration for the Savior to make, was it not,
when the promise to the thief, made three days previously was to the
effect that upon that day they should both be in His presence?"

"Why, Mr. Durant," exclaimed Claire, "I can't understand it at all; He
did certainly make the promise, and yet from His words, spoken three
days after, it appears that He had not yet been to His Father. Can it
be that one of our Savior's promises has really fallen to the ground
unfulfilled?"

"Not in the least, Mrs. Sutherland; it is merely another one of those
cases where we read but fail to understand. 'The letter killeth but
the Spirit giveth life,' you know. Christ kept His word with the
malefactor, and He also spoke truthfully to Mary. He and the sinner
undoubtedly went on the day mentioned to paradise, but the great
mistake, made by many, lies in believing that paradise is heaven."

"Well, if paradise is not heaven, what is it? If they went to some
other place, where is that place?" exclaimed Mr. Williams. "I believe
it was heaven."

"I do not doubt your statement for a moment. Prof. A. Hindercoper, a
German writer, says: 'In the second and third centuries every branch
and division of the Christian church, so far as their records enable us
to judge, believed that Christ preached to the departed spirits.' This
is in harmony with the belief of the Latter-day Saints, as well as in
harmony with the Bible. Peter speaking upon this subject answers your
question by saying: 'For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death
in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: by which also He went and
preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometimes were disobedient,
when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while
the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved
by water.' Christ undoubtedly understood that His mission would not
end with His crucifixion, but as He finished His mission to mortals
by opening to them the gospel gates, it would be the beginning of His
mission, for a similar purpose, with those on the other side of the
vail, and realizing that His mission there would begin immediately upon
His release here, and that the malefactor would meet him there, He
made the promise mentioned: 'Today shalt thou be with me in paradise.'
Peter declares that they were visited and preached to in order that
they might be judged according to man in the flesh, but live according
to God in the spirit. (I. Peter iv: 6.) Bishop Alford, speaking of
the declaration made by the chief apostle, said: 'I understand these
words (I. Peter iii: 19) to say that our Lord in his disembodied state,
did go to the place of detention of departed spirits, and did there
announce his work of redemption; preach salvation in fact, to the
disembodied spirits of those who refused to obey the voice of God when
the judgment of the flood was hanging over them."

"That seems reasonable, and it has given me a pew idea and something to
consider," said Williams, "but how about the ordinances you claim are
necessary for all? How can those who did not hear the gospel before
they died, receive the ordinances?"

"Now we believe that those who embraced the gospel in the spirit world
will be saved; and believe with the scriptures that a vicarious work
must be performed for them by the living. This doctrine was evidently
understood by the saints in the days of the apostles. Paul informs us
that the first gospel ordinance of all dispensations, baptism, was
administered by proxy among the former-day Saints. While teaching the
Corinthian saints about the resurrection, (I Cor. xv: 29) he asks them:
'Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
rise not at all?' in other words, of what use is baptism for the dead,
if there is no resurrection? showing that the doctrine of baptism
for the dead was evidently neither new nor strange to the people to
whom the apostle was writing. Christ died for the dead as well as the
living: "For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that
he might be the Lord both of the dead and the living." (Rom. xiv: 9.)

"But do you mean that living persons shall be baptized for the dead?"

"Certainly. Before the great day of the Lord shall come 'that shall
burn as an oven, and when all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly
shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith
the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch,'
(Mal. iv: 1,) an important event is to take place, as we learn from
the same prophet, verses 5 and 6: 'Behold I will send you Elijah the
prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;
and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the
heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth
with a curse.' The coming of Elijah, to inaugurate this great work must
evidently be to some one who is prepared to receive him. His mission,
'to turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers' is very comprehensive, and pertains to
the whole family of Adam, there being no discrimination between the
living and the dead, between those who have lived in the past and those
who shall live in the future. There must be a welding link between the
fathers and their children, and that welding link is baptism for the
dead. We testify that Elijah has come; that he appeared to Joseph,
the seer, and Oliver Cowdery, in the Kirtland Temple, on the 3rd of
April, 1836, and said: 'Behold, the time has fully come, which was
spoken of by the mouth of Malachi, testifying that he (Elijah) should
be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers,
lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse. Therefore, the keys of
this dispensation are committed into your hands, and by this ye may
know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the
doors.' Ordinances for the salvation of the dead require temples, or
sacred places, especially constructed for their administration; for
this reason, we build temples, and also, that we may perform other
ordinances for the dead and the living."

"I have heard that the organization of your Church is unusually
complete. How is it organized?" asked one of the visitors present.

"It is organized on the foundation of Apostles and Prophets. We
have therefore various quorums of these in the Church organized by
revelation for the efficient and harmonious performance of church
duties. There is the First Presidency, chosen from those who hold the
High Priesthood and Apostleship, consisting of a President and two
counsellors. The duty of the President is to preside over the whole
Church, and he is sustained by the whole people as a seer, a revelator,
a translator, and a prophet."

"What is meant by Priesthood? You must have two Priesthoods then, as
you speak of the High Priesthood, indicating there must be a lower one?"

"The Church is governed by the Holy Priesthood, which is divided into
two grand heads the Aaronic or lesser and the Melchisedek or higher.

"The Melchisedek Priesthood, so called because Melchisedek was such a
great High Priest, and also to avoid the too frequent use of Jehovah's
name, as this Priesthood was formerly called after the order of His
Son,--holds the right of presidency, to receive revelations from heaven
and to enjoy the spiritual blessings; while the Aaronic Priesthood, so
called because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed forever, holds
the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in the outward
ordinances of the Church. The offices of the Melchisedek Priesthood
include Apostles, Seventies, Patriarchs or Evangelists, and Elders, and
the Aaronic Priesthood includes Bishops, Priests, Teachers and Deacons.

"Next to the quorum of the First Presidency is the Twelve Apostles,
then the High Council, the Seventies, the High Priests, the Elders, and
the quorums of the Lesser Priesthood.

"Each calling has its own duties to be performed, and the organization
is such that one does not come in conflict with the other."

The company now parted for the evening, each hoping that an opportunity
might be given to hear the Elder again.



CHAPTER XII.

A BAPTISM AND A CONVERSATION ON MARRIAGE.

It will be remembered that on the evening of Mr. Durant's speech in the
Town Hall at Westminster, an old lady came to him at the close of the
meeting and whispered a "God bless you" to him. The truths uttered by
him had made a deep impression upon her and were working to bear fruit.
She had now made application to be baptized, convinced, as she was, of
the truths of the gospel, and that this servant of God was authorized,
by direct calling from Him through revelation, to perform the solemn
ceremony. It was agreed, therefore, that the baptism should take place
on an afternoon some time before the day of his departure to his home
in the West.

He made it a point to obtain a conversation with the lady, and show
to her the importance of the step she was about to take. It is no
simple or indifferent affair. It is a contract with God, fraught with
wonderful results, to the person who makes it, that will either lead to
rich blessings or to condemnation. When one man makes a contract with
another, the breaker of such a contract must be willing to suffer the
ignominy attending his deceit. In baptism, the subject makes a solemn
vow with his Creator, and, rising from the waters in which he is buried
in the likeness of the death of Christ, he should thenceforth walk in
newness of life, and should not serve sin. He is made free from sin,
and becomes a servant to God, he has his fruit unto holiness and the
end is everlasting life. (Romans vi.)

The earnestness of the new convert's faith and repentance was inquired
into, and it was pointed out to her that she should prepare herself to
receive the testimony of the Spirit, which is made known to different
individuals in different ways not always by unusual manifestations, but
frequently by the calm self-consciousness of peace that comes from a
performance of righteous acts, in which the Spirit bears witness with
our spirit that we are the children of God, heirs and joint heirs with
Christ. We must not look for approval from friends, relatives or people
of the world, in taking this step, but be prepared to suffer with
Christ that we may be also glorified with Him, and exclaim with Paul:
"I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." (Rom. viii:
18.) Like Christ, one must bear the cross upon the lone way, full of
hope, confidence and zeal, knowing that the end is everlasting life.

Having said this much, and given many other incidental instructions,
that would thoroughly impress the new convert with the sacredness and
importance of the step about to be taken, Mr. Durant, members of the
Marshall family, and a number of strangers, anxious to witness the
ceremony, made their way, on a pleasant afternoon, to a beautiful wood
where a stream wound its clear, slow waters in fantastic forms to empty
into one of the large rivers. The autumn tints, the sun casting its
warm influence to the earth through the gray atmosphere, the rustle of
the wind in the falling leaves, and the beauty of nature all around,
made the scene grand and romantic. Some who had gone along to make
sport of the "Mormon baptism," were awed into strange silence by the
beauty of the scene, and by the solemnity and scripture-like simplicity
of the ceremony. After a word of prayer had been offered, in which Mr.
Durant invoked the blessings of God upon the ordinance about to be
performed, and asked that all disturbing spirits might be banished, he
took the lady by the hand and waded with her out into the water, and,
in the stillness which followed (those upon the shore unconsciously
remaining uncovered), he was heard to say, as he held the old lady's
hands in his left, and raised his right hand into the air: "Julia
Howard, having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen."

Then he immersed her in the water, and both came forth again out of the
water.

The company soon dispersed, and upon arrival at her home, the new
convert was confirmed, she preferring this to having that ordinance
performed upon the water's edge, which is frequently done. Mr. Durant
placed his hands upon her head, and by virtue of his calling and
authority, confirmed her a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, and, in the manner of the apostles of old, bestowed
upon her the gift of the Holy Ghost which he promised should be a light
to her all her days.

The Elder was about to leave, having welcomed the new member and
congratulated her upon the step she had taken, when he was somewhat
surprised by a remark she made in which she expressed a desire to
gather with the Saints.

The spirit of gathering had already rested upon her, and he explained
to her the importance of this principle of the gospel. The Father
desires that His children shall be gathered in unto one place where
their hearts shall be prepared against the day when tribulation and
desolation shall come upon the wicked. The Psalmist referred to this
subject and exclaimed: "Gather my Saints together who have made a
covenant with me by sacrifice." (Ps. 1: 5.) Isaiah, looking to the
future, saw that in the last days the mountain of the Lord's house
should be established in the tops of the mountains to which all nations
should go. (Isaiah ii: 2.) Here the Lord was to give them one heart,
and make an everlasting covenant with them. (Isaiah xxxii: 37-44.)
And in that day the Lord should set His hand again the second time
to recover the remnants of His people. (Isaiah xi: 11-16.) John, the
revelator, saw this time, and heard a voice from heaven saying: "Come
out of her [Babylon] my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins
and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. xviii: 4.) It was,
therefore, in strict accordance with the scriptures that she should
have the desire to gather, as well as that the Saints should have an
assembling place where they might learn to walk in the paths of God
more strictly than in the world. There are ordinances, too, to be
performed in the holy temples, for the living and the dead, that cannot
be done elsewhere. It is not well, however, that this act of gathering
should be considered thoughtlessly and in haste, but rather with
deliberation and careful forethought.

In the conversation, Elder Durant had incidentally remarked, that
marriage was not only for time but also for all eternity. The newly
wedded couple, Mr. and Mrs. Sutherland, who had remained to witness the
confirmation, were naturally interested in this, and the subject was
further inquired into by them.

"What is the belief of the Latter-day Saints in relation to marriage?"
said Mr. Sutherland.

"We believe," said Durant, "that marriage is ordained of God, and is
binding for eternity, when properly performed by a servant of God
having authority."

"Then it would appear that you believe in the family relation
continuing throughout eternity?"

"Certainly, why not? Everything that is done by the Lord receives the
impress of eternity. That being the case, marriage, being sanctioned
and ordained of Him, is also eternal if performed by one having power
as the ancient apostles had, to bind on earth and it should be bound in
heaven. It then becomes a work of God, and, as the Preacher exclaims:
'I know that whatsoever God doeth it shall be forever; nothing can be
put to it, nor anything taken from it.' (Eccles. iii: 14.) Can you
think of anything more comforting than that the loving ties formed in
this world are to endure through out the ages of eternity?"

"It is certainly more pleasant than to dwell upon a union that shall
last only 'till death do you part;' but what proofs have you that your
view of the matter is correct?"

"In the first marriage that was ever performed, when the Creator joined
together Adam and Eve as the parents of the human race, we have no
record of its being done to last only 'till death do you part,' and
we do not learn that He set any limit to the continuance of their
marriage relations. Why should we doubt that the gift of Eve to Adam,
was designed to be eternal? They were married before the Fall, before
death came into the world. They were eternal beings not subject to
death; death was not considered when God gave her to be his companion
and helpmeet. Why then should we conclude that death should void the
contract or separate them any more than that it should destroy the
spirit? If their spirits could be restored with resurrected bodies,
why should not the eternal work of God in joining them as one remain
unbroken? The whole second chapter of Genesis breathes the spirit of
everlasting union between Adam and Eve. In the eighteenth verse we are
told by the Lord that, 'it is not good that the man should be alone.'
Adam, the man, was created an eternal being, and when God said that
it was not good for him to be alone, we must conclude it was not good
that he should be alone in immortality; so the Lord gave him Eve for
no particular period of his life, but evidently, as she was also an
eternal being, to be his wife forever the union to last as long as they
should last eternally."

"That seems reasonable, and it is a pleasant hope you have," said
Claire.

"With us it is more than a hope; it is knowledge. There are other
passages of scripture which bear upon the inseparable connection
between man and wife, in marriage as ordained of God. Paul (Eph. v: 22)
says: 'The husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the head
of the Church.' Christ remains forever the head of the Church, and even
so the husband remains the head of the wife eternally."

"What do you mean by saying 'in marriage as ordained of God?' Is not
all marriage ordained of Him?" said Mr. Sutherland.

"By marriage as ordained of God, I mean marriage performed in the
way He has appointed, by a man whom He has authorized to act in His
stead. What man does of himself, without authority from God, must be
like him limited to this life. Now, like the authority to baptize,
this authority to marry in the way God has ordained, must come by
revelation from Him, for no man can take these honors to himself. To
find this authority, we must look for it among a people who believe in
revelation, and not among churches who declare that the heavens are
sealed, and that no further revelation is necessary."



CHAPTER XIII.

ABOUT THE MORMONS.

The day upon which the Mormon Elder was to leave his missionary field
to return to his home in the mountains, was rapidly approaching. Mr.
Brown, the lawyer, had become so interested in the missionary and his
peculiar people that this gentleman determined to accompany him to
Utah, to see for himself what he had heard so much concerning.

On the evening before their departure, all the old friends were
gathered at the Marshall residence, or hotel, and quite naturally the
conversation turned to the contemplated trip to Utah, and from that to
the motives which led the Mormons to settle in that territory.

"What were the considerations that led to the settling of Utah by the
Mormons?" asked one of the members of the little company.

"Persecution by their enemies was the primary cause," said the Elder.
"After the death of the Prophet Joseph, they were driven from their
homes in Nauvoo, and hence sought a new abiding place in the West."

"How did the death of Joseph, the Prophet, occur?" asked Mr. Brown.

"He was murdered in cold blood by masked men. You understand that
all innovations on existing conditions have been opposed from time
immemorial. The gospel has particularly been combatted in all ages,
as its history amply illustrates. The people of their time did not
tolerate Christ and His apostles, and ceased not persecuting them as
long as they lived upon the earth. They were all at last put to death.
The truths which the Latter-day prophet taught were the same as were
expounded by the Savior and his followers, and opposition to these came
as naturally as that a similar cause produces a similar effect. The
prophet was finally martyred for the testimony which he bore. He had
been brought continually before the courts which, however, could prove
no guilt against him, for he was innocent of any other offense than
that of preaching the gospel of Christ, and bearing his testimony that
the God of heaven had again spoken to man. Some three days previous to
his assassination, he went to the city of Carthage, in Illinois, Nauvoo
being then the abiding place of the Saints, to deliver himself up to
the pretended requirements of the law. The governor of the state had
pledged his word, as the chief executive, that the prophet should be
protected, but no effort was made to fulfill this pledge, and so Joseph
and his brother Hyrum were shot in Carthage jail, on the 27th of June,
1844, by an armed mob, composed of about two hundred persons who had
painted themselves black."

"Did this murder of their prophet have the effect of discouraging the
Saints, or rather, did they feel disposed to abandon the cause for
which they had so far battled?"

"It is very natural that they felt discouraged and that some wavered
in their course, but the great majority were inclined to continue with
unfaltering zeal in the work, because they knew for themselves that
the true gospel had been restored, and that they were engaged in the
work of God. And here let me remark that the strength of the Church
consists in the personal knowledge and testimony of the members. The
Spirit of God fills each member with unfaltering faith, and he builds
his superstructure of religious belief on personal knowledge, imparted
to him, by the power of the Spirit, through revelation. This testimony
remains as long as the person lives uprightly and honorably before
the Lord, doing nothing to grieve it away. Instead of scattering and
abandoning the Church, leaving it to die, as was expected and desired
by its enemies, and which would doubtless have been the case if it
had not been divinely established, the people gathered strength and,
through the assistance of God, and the leadership of Apostle Brigham
Young, forsook their homes in their beloved Nauvoo, crossed the
trackless plains, scaled the mountains, and in the midst of a desolate
wilderness founded a commonwealth which has attracted the attention and
the admiration of the whole world."

"How did Brigham Young come to be the leader of the people?" asked Mr.
Sutherland.

"He was the president of the Twelve Apostles, the quorum next in
authority to the First Presidency, upon whom naturally rested the
keys of the kingdom, upon whom, in fact, was conferred the power or
authority that the prophet had received from on high. Sidney Rigdon and
others sought the honor of leading the Church, but the Lord, through
the manifestations of His Spirit, chose Brigham Young for the place,
as president of the Twelve Apostles, the people sustaining him by
their vote, at a meeting held in the grove near the temple at Nauvoo,
on the 8th of August, 1844. He was afterwards, December, 1847, chosen
president of the whole Church. He felt the power of his calling, and
made preparations for the great exodus of the people to the West, which
had been considered during the lifetime of the prophet, but which was
now made absolutely necessary by the persecution of the enemies of the
Church. In 1845, anti-Mormon delegates from nine counties of Illinois
met, at Carthage, and demanded the removal of the Saints. The Council
of Apostles agreed to their demands, knowing full well that there
was no alternative between exodus or extermination by massacre. In
February, 1846, the exodus began by the Saints crossing the Mississippi
River, the remnant following on September 17th of the same year, and
the movement triumphantly continued, with interruptions, under severest
difficulties and hardships, until the pioneers, on July 24th, 1847,
entered the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Something of the hardships
which they endured, and of the magnitude of their undertaking, the
historians have graphically pictured. Tullidge says:

"'The Mormons were setting out under their leader from the borders of
civilization, with their wives and their children, in broad daylight,
before the very eyes of ten thousand of their enemies, who would have
preferred their utter destruction to their 'flight,' notwithstanding
they had enforced it by treaties outrageous beyond description,
inasmuch as the exiles were nearly all American born, many of them
tracing their ancestors to the very founders of the nation. They had
to make a journey of fifteen hundred miles over trackless prairies,
sandy deserts and rocky mountains, through bands of war-like Indians,
who had been driven, exasperated, towards the West; and at last, to
seek out and build up their Zion in valleys then unfruitful, in a
solitary region where the foot of the white man had scarcely trodden.
These, too, were to be followed by the aged, the halt, the sick and the
blind, the poor, who were to be helped by their little less destitute
brethren, and the delicate young mother with her newborn babe at her
breast, and still worse, for they were not only threatened with the
extermination of the poor remnant at Nauvoo, but news had arrived that
the parent government designed to pursue their pioneers with troops,
take from them their arms, and scatter them, that they might perish by
the way, and leave their bones bleaching in the wilderness. * * * In
the centuries hence, when the passing events of this age shall have
taken their proper place, the historian will point back to that exodus
in the New World of the West, as one quite worthy to rank with the
immortal exodus of the children of Israel.'

"Bancroft says:

"'Of their long journey many painful incidents are recorded. Weakened
by fever or crippled by rheumatism, and with sluggish circulation,
many were severely frostbitten. Women were compelled to drive the
nearly worn-out teams, while tending on their knees, perhaps, their
sick children. The strength of the beasts was failing, as there were
intervals when they could be kept from starving only by the browse or
tender buds and branches of the cottonwood, felled for the purpose.

"'At one time no less than two thousand wagons could be counted, it was
said, along the three hundred miles of road that separated Nauvoo from
the Mormon encampments. Many families possessed no wagons, and in the
long processions might be seen vehicles of all descriptions, from the
lumbering cart, under whose awning lay stretched its fever-stricken
driver, to the veriest makeshifts of poverty, the wheel-barrow or the
two-wheeled trundle, in which was dragged along a bundle of clothing
and a sack of meal all of this world's goods that the owner possessed.

"'On arriving at the banks of the Missouri, the wagons were drawn up in
double lines and in the form of squares. Between the lines, tents were
pitched at intervals, space being left between each row for a passage
way, which was shaded with awnings or a latticework of branches, and
served as a promenade for convalescents and a playground for children.'

"But it would be too long a story, to follow the exiles in their
vicissitudes through the whole of their weary march across the
uninhabited wilderness that lay between them and their future home,
in the then wild valleys of the mountains, and to speak of their
struggles for existence after they arrived there. They passed through
many severe afflictions in building up the country and in settling the
territory. The crops were often destroyed by grass-hoppers, crickets,
untimely frosts, and drought, but in each difficulty, the Lord
overruled circumstances for good and prospered the people, providing
the necessaries of life. Settlements were established at various points
north and south of Salt Lake City, and the thrift of the people,
seasoned with the blessings of God, soon caused cities and villages to
spring up in all directions. President Young, himself, often went to
seek locations for these sites, and was very frequently present when a
city or town was founded."

"Truly, a wonderful people with a strange and fascinating history. I am
more enthusiastic than ever in my determination to see them and their
gathering place," said Mr. Brown.

The evening was far spent, and the company prepared to retire,
after the usual leave-taking on such occasions. They all wished the
missionary and Mr. Brown a pleasant journey. The parting was affecting,
for the people had learned to love the Elder, and he, in turn, had a
strong and living interest in them. Many missionaries can testify of
the binding influence such friends have upon their affections, and
people who have learned to love the Elders are frequently as loth
to part with them as with members of their own families. This case
was no exception. Durant thanked them all for their kindness to him,
and blessed them for their hospitality, expressing a desire to see
them gathered with the Saints, if God should open their hearts to an
adoption of the gospel truths.

Early on the following morning, the Elder and Mr. Brown set their faces
to the West, and with the present facilities for travel, expected soon
to be in the land of the Mormons. As they passed over the vast plains,
large rivers, rolling and rugged hills, and pleasant valleys, their
conversation was often directed to the great difference between travel
as the pioneers endured it, and as it is now enjoyed in the trains of
palace coaches.

On a pleasant Saturday evening, after a four days' journey, they
arrived in Salt Lake City, where Durant met his family all feeling
well. The meeting between husband and wife and children, after such a
long separation, was happy in the extreme, and it was with thankful
hearts that they kneeled by the family altar, praising God in fervent
prayer for His kind mercies in preserving them to meet once more.

During the afternoon of the next day, Sunday, they all attended
meeting, where an Elder delivered the following discourse, which Mr.
Brown listened to with marked attention:

"MY BRETHREN, SISTERS AND FRIENDS:

"I am thankful for the privilege of speaking to you a short time this
afternoon. I am anxious to explain, whenever opportunity affords, the
nature of our faith.

"In this free country, where we congratulate ourselves in enjoying and
allowing the greatest freedom to everybody, I presume we will, all of
us, speaker and congregation, exercise the privilege of explaining and
reflecting upon the things that may be said, so that our friends, I
trust, will leave us understanding a little more about the nature of
our religion than when they came to the meeting.

"Our visiting friends have, doubtless, heard about the Latter-day
Saints. They have had the opinions of men who have spoken in the
pulpits, and who have written books about the Mormons, and they, very
likely, have come here under certain impressions in regard to the
Mormons' faith.

"I am sorry to say that experience has taught me that the public
generally have been deceived. I am gratified sometimes in listening to
acknowledgements of this kind from those who have heard for themselves,
and have thus been able to judge intelligently as to whether the
reports which they have heard from our enemies are correct or not.

"It seems strange, but it is nevertheless true, that many people who
wish to know the faith of the Saints go to their enemies to learn
of them. I do not know whether our kind friends have thought of the
inconsistency and injustice of such a course as this. If I wished to
learn what the Roman Catholics believed in, I do not think at present
that I would go to the Protestant Church to learn it; or if I wished
to learn what any denomination of professing Christians believe, I do
not think it would be just for me to go to some other denomination to
ascertain it. In the first place, other churches might be led perhaps
unwittingly, perhaps intentionally to misrepresent the faith of their
neighbors, and I might be deceived through their misrepresentations.
On the other hand, there is no need of my going to any one church to
learn the faith of another people, because I can go just as easily to
their own church to listen to their explanations, and thus be sure
of getting information of their peculiar views, without trusting to
the misrepresentations of their neighbors. Now I submit that such a
course as this is right; it is just, and accords with our impressions
of a fair and just hearing and consideration from the parties most
interested, as to whether their faith be correct or not.

"Of course we have no disposition, as Latter-day Saints, even if we had
the power, to constrain any person to believe our doctrines. We have
not the power; we have not the disposition. We simply wish to explain
the nature of that religion of which we are ministers--laboring under a
feeling of anxiety to deliver the message with which we have been sent,
that our friends may have the privilege of receiving or rejecting it,
just as they think proper.

"I approach the examination of this subject, because I believe that
many of our kind, honest, well-wishing friends--those who desire to
serve God according to His will and pleasure--are under the impression
that there exists a confusion so general, and errors so prevalent, that
religion seems to be losing its hold upon the minds of the people.
And, of course, we who have faith in God and in His revealed word, as
contained in the Old and New Testaments, deplore a state of things that
indicates a departure from that respect and reverence which we wish
to see existing and manifested on the part of the people towards the
Supreme Being.

"What is the reason that people are becoming irreligious? What is the
reason that people talk of sacred things lightly? What is the reason
that men who have heretofore been respected as ministers of religion
are now little thought of? It is simply because the religions that
are taught are losing their hold upon the minds and affections of the
people; because the religions that are taught do not supply the want
that men and women feel; because the word preached by most ministers
carries with it no power to convince people as to the truthfulness of
the doctrines that are presented, or the sinful condition of the people
to whom they are taught.

"The present condition of the Christian world does not present that
union, that love, that we expect from the perpetuation of the doctrines
that Christ taught, and it is this fact, understood by many, that
increases their doubts and strengthens their objections to what is
called 'Christianity.' The New Testament teachings lead us to expect a
state of unity in the Christian Church. The admonitions of the Apostles
were to the effect that the Saints in early days should be united
together, that they should understand alike, that they should speak
the same things, that they should be of the same mind and of the same
judgment. Such are the words of the Apostle, to be found in I. Cor. i:
10.

"Now, my friends, does such a state of things exist around us in
connection with the Christian churches that we might expect from the
nature of a perfect religion, introduced by Christ? Does there exist,
at the present time, a state of things so perfect as to agree with the
expectations raised from the teachings of St. Paul in this scripture
that I have quoted? I think not. I am safe, I believe, in stating--and
I think our friends are prepared to agree with me--that there does
not exist amongst the Christian denominations that unity and that
oneness of faith, peace, kindness and love which, by reading the New
Testament, we might expect to appear amongst them as the true fruits of
Christianity. And it is upon this I wish to make a few remarks before
proceeding to explain to you, from the Bible, the nature of our faith.

"Of course the existence of a number of denominations called
'Christian' cannot be denied. But we are told that all the Christian
churches exhibit to us one church; that if one denomination does not
teach the whole perfect plan of religion revealed by the Lord Jesus
Christ, all the churches put together do; although there may be
divisions existing amongst the members of these denominations. Unless
we accept this view we must object to Christianity on the ground
that we cannot find which of all the Christian denominations teach
the truth. Here is one church called Christian that teaches certain
doctrines, another more or less in its teachings contradicts them, a
third teaches doctrines that are in conflict with the other two, and
so we might go through them all, and speak in like terms of those who
think honestly enough that they are serving God.

"Now, my friends, I will ask this question--First, Is it reasonable
to suppose that God would sustain two distinct religious churches as
His churches? Is it reasonable to suppose that God would set up two
distinct religious bodies, the ministers of which teach different
doctrines? After learning from the Bible so much indicating the anxiety
of God's inspired servants for a time of perfect unity, I say it is not
reasonable to suppose it. And just so long as two distinct religious
systems exist, teaching different doctrines and preaching different
principles, there exists a conflicting influence, divisions, feelings,
perhaps very strong, if the difference in doctrine is very decided. If
it is not reasonable, what are we to do? How can we account for such a
condition of things?

"This leads to the position we occupy. We want to know something more.

"Is it true that the bodies called 'Christian' at present represent
the Church of Christ? Or is it true that they have ignored some things
belonging to the perfect doctrine of Christ, and taken as their guide,
their own conclusions in regard to what is right, which leads to this
division of doctrine? How is it? But I will endeavor to show that it
is unscriptural, as well as unreasonable, for us to receive different
Christian bodies as the Church of Christ.

"I will direct your attention to a few passages from the word of God.
Jesus, when He sent the Apostles to preach in the first place, said
to them, 'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every
creature.' Not _any_ system that might be termed a gospel. There
was no choice left to anybody. He spoke definitely in regard to the
gospel plan, which He, the Son of God, came to the earth to set up.
Paul, in the first chapter of Galatians, eighth verse, says, 'Though
we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.' Paul, one of
the Apostles, taught the gospel, the same gospel that Peter, James,
John and others taught. They all taught the same system. And Paul
said, in another place, that he went up, by revelation, to Jerusalem,
taking Barnabas and Titus with him, and communicated the gospel which
he preached among the Gentiles (Gal. ii: 1, 2), thus showing that he
taught the same thing everywhere. You see, Paul's words and practice
show that he did not admit of the least change or alteration from the
gospel as taught by Christ, and preached by the Apostles to the people.
In another place it is said, 'Whosoever transgresseth and abideth
not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the
doctrines of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son' (II. John
ix.), showing us that he taught strictly the necessity of abiding in
that form of doctrine which had at first been delivered. I quote these
passages to show you that the gospel which Christ and the Apostles
first taught was intended to be taught continually, without change, and
that none had a right, not even an angel from heaven, to preach any
other gospel than that which had been delivered at the first.

"Do you agree with this? Because I am about to examine, in detail some
of the doctrines that will readily show to you the difference between
the ministers of the true gospel and the ministers of the so-called
gospel that is preached at the present time. But are you prepared to
come to the conclusion, with me, that it is the old gospel, Christ's
gospel, the doctrines of the apostles that we ought to seek and follow,
if we expect eternal life? Or do you think you are safe in following
the teachings of men, who have made great changes from such ancient
gospel, with the following passage before you? "If there come any
unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God speed." (II. John 10th verse.) Do you think you can
obtain God's blessing by being members of a church or churches that
teach doctrines opposed to what Christ taught? How is this?

"'Well certainly,' says one--a Bible believer--'of course I wish to
have the religion of the Bible. I would like to have the religion
of Christ. I do not admit of any departure.' This is right. This is
consistent. Of course if there is a question as to whether God has
made any change in His primitive faith, revealed through Christ, we
shall consider it; for I am willing also to make a change if God has
authorized it. I am quite willing to accept any doctrine that God has
revealed from heaven for my salvation. I confess to you that I have no
disposition whatever to maintain private views or speculations which
may have been engendered on my own part through reflection. I wish the
doctrine of Christ, as Christ taught it, as the apostles taught it, and
I will not, with the light that I possess, depart one particle from the
letter and spirit of that ancient plan. And if there are any friends
here who have heard that the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints do not believe in the Bible, let them judge. There
are no practices pleasing to God, or likely to bring His blessings
upon the heads of the children of men, except those inculcated by Him,
through His servants by the power of revelation from heaven, so that
we will not depart from the book. We will not teach doctrines that are
opposed to this book, but we are prepared to show our friends, in the
spirit of kindness, that doctrines opposed to those contained in this
book are displeasing to God, and are not calculated to bring peace and
salvation to the children of men.

"'But,' says one, 'what matters it whether we go this road that you
point out or some other? You know if we can get to heaven one way,
is not that as good as another? We will try to illustrate this idea.
If a man wish to go to London, says the inquirer, may he not go the
road that leads towards the south, or a road that leads towards the
north, as the case may be; what matters it so that he gets to London?
It would not matter in the least. He might go the road that led to
the north or that which led to the south, and by making a shorter or
longer journey, as the case might be, he might get to London. But you
see there is no parallel between this figure and the facts in regard
to religion because there are not two ways to get to heaven. That is
the difference. There are two ways to get to London probably, perhaps
more, but you see there is only one way to get to heaven, so that when
we admit, as an illustration, a figure of this kind, we start with an
error and it leads us astray.

"The Bible speaks of one way. It speaks of two ways. It speaks of a
broad road that leads to destruction, and it speaks of a narrow way
that leads to eternal life. So you see there is only one way that leads
to heaven, and if any one persuades us that the wide road will lead us
there, he deceives us, for there is only one way, and it is narrow. The
Bible is very plain upon this, because the doctrines are steadfast and
sure, and the words are plain that there is but one way that leads to
life and glory. Now that is the way we want to find out.

"Jesus came, He said, to do His Father's will, not His own. He called
Apostles and ordained them, and He said, "As I have been sent, so
send I you. Go and preach the gospel to every creature." That was
their business. But He said, 'Tarry ye first in Jerusalem, until ye
are endowed with power from on high.' Jesus called the Apostles.
He ordained them Himself. He instructed them personally, and He
commissioned them to preach the gospel to every creature. But He wished
them to tarry at Jerusalem until they received power from on high;
a certain gift which God had promised that they might be qualified,
in every sense, to discharge the important duty devolving upon them,
of administering words of salvation to a fallen world. The Apostles
did this. They gathered in Jerusalem. They were there on the day of
Pentecost, and whilst there, in the upper room, the endowment of which
Jesus spoke was given unto them. The Holy Ghost came upon them, in the
upper room, as a mighty rushing wind, and it sat upon them as cloven
tongues of fire. And, whilst under that influence, the Apostles who
were sent to preach the gospel, stood up, at least Peter did, as the
mouth-piece of the rest, at that time to preach the gospel that Christ
sent them to declare. Now, what was it? Let us lay a good foundation as
we proceed.

"Were they qualified to preach it? I do not think any Christian will
doubt it. If they were not prepared to teach the gospel of the Son of
God, then I would have no hope, my friends, of hearing it in this life.
Never. Jesus Himself chose them. He ordained them; He instructed them,
and after all this, as you will find in the 2nd chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, 1st, 2nd and 3rd verses, they assembled in Jerusalem, and
had fulfilled unto them the promise of the Lord Jesus Christ, receiving
the endowment of which I have been speaking.

"I think that all my friends here are certainly prepared to accept the
words that Peter spoke, and acknowledge them to be true. What did
Peter say? First, he preached Christ and Him crucified. You see the
people, who had gathered together on the day of Pentecost, were people,
who had no faith in Christ. They had rejected Him and His instructions.
They had been of those who persecuted Christ and the Apostles. They
were of those who had either personally or in their sympathies
sustained the crucifixion of the Lord Jesus. Therefore, Peter, knowing
this, stood up and preached to them, first Christ and Him crucified,
and he was successful. Who can doubt it? Peter, a servant of God,
ordained by the Son of God. Peter, upon whom the Spirit of God rested
as tongues of fire, as the scriptures have it. This man stood up and
argued the point, and explained about Jesus. And who can doubt the
result? I am sure we would have been disappointed if we had been told
in the Bible that Peter was not successful. He was successful. Many
believed on him, and the result of their belief was that they said,
'Men and brethren, what shall we do?' (Acts ii: 37.) No wonder they
asked that question. People who had either helped to crucify the Lord,
or who had rejoiced when He was crucified, as many of them did, to be
convinced that that same Jesus whom they had assisted to crucify was
indeed the Lord, the Christ; and when they were convinced of this they
cried out, 'Men and brethren, what shall we do?'

"Peter was prepared to tell them. He had the very instructions that
were needed, and the words of Peter are applicable today, my friends,
to you and to me, so far as we have not obeyed them.

"We are believers in Christ, I trust. We have fortunately made our
appearance in this life, in the midst of a people who at least believe
in the divinity of Christ, and we have received impressions favorable
to this end; therefore the words of Peter, spoken to those who believed
in the divinity of Christ, are applicable to us, and are the words of
salvation to us, if that ancient gospel is not changed. What were the
words? He says, 'Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost.' (Acts ii: 38.)

"Was that the gospel? Yes, unless the Apostles disobeyed the
instruction of Christ, because they were sent to preach the gospel, and
they were endowed that they might preach it perfectly and represent
God, the Maker of heaven and earth, in the words and spirit by which
they presented it unto the people.

"Now, my friends, faith in Christ was the first principle of the
gospel; repentance of sins was the second principle; baptism for the
remission of sins was the third principle, and then the reception of
the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands, as taught by Peter on that
day in Jerusalem. Is there any objection to this? 'None at all,' says
one, 'that is scriptural; we cannot object to it.' A Bible believer
cannot object to it. But what is becoming of us if such doctrines are
not taught? 'Well,' says one, are they not taught?' No. 'Faith in
Christ is taught,' and 'repentance of sins is taught,' although by some
people the latter is taught first, before faith in Christ. Some teach
that we must repent of our sins before we can have faith in Christ.
This is a mistake. We cannot possibly repent of sin committed, unless
we are convinced that we have committed the sin. We cannot repent of
laws broken, which Christ has taught through His Apostles unless we
are first convinced that Jesus was divine, and had the authority to
teach them; so that faith in Christ and His divine mission must be
the foundation of our practice as Christians. And the first effect
that faith in Christ produces, is repentance of the sins which we
have committed. So repentance is the second principle of the gospel.
But we differ a little more about the third principle. Just read your
Bible, and you will find that Peter taught baptism for the remission
of sins (Acts ii: 38). Again, John the Baptist, who was the forerunner
of Christ, baptized for the remission of sins (Mark i: 4). 'John was
sent from God.' You will find this in the 1st chapter of the gospel
according to St. John, 6th verse. John himself said, in the 33rd verse
of the same chapter, 'He that sent me to baptize with water, the same
said unto me,' referring to the instruction he received from the Father
regarding Christ. Both passages assert this, that John the Baptist was
sent by God to baptize with water, and we are taught in the Bible that
he did teach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. That
is just what we might expect. John was God's servant. So was Peter.
They both taught the same doctrine. John taught baptism, and Peter
told the people to be baptized every one of them. You will remember
the servant of God who was sent to speak to Paul, to instruct him just
after his conversion. He went to him, and when the scales fell from
the eyes of Paul, or Saul, this man of God said to him: 'Why tarriest
thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon
the name of the Lord' (Acts xxii: 16). Be baptized and wash away his
sins? Yes. Now, that agrees exactly with the doctrine of Peter, and the
doctrine of John the Baptist. They were all three servants of God, and
they all taught the same doctrine, and those who heard and believed
that doctrine possessed the selfsame faith; so that so far as baptism
is concerned, the ancient Saints did teach and practice the selfsame
doctrine--baptism for the remission of sins.

"I want to talk a little about this. One says, 'Well, I have always
been taught that baptism was a doctrine of Christ anciently, but I have
been under the impression that it was not necessary to salvation.'
That may be, my friends, we have been taught a great many things, and
good Christian people have believed a great many things that Christian
people have rejected since. But that is no reason why we should change
the Bible doctrine. The thing is right here. 'Well,' says one, 'I
thought we were not able of ourselves to do anything to help to save
ourselves.' This requires proper understanding. If baptism brings the
remission of sins, and baptism is not attended to by us, we cannot
obtain the blessing. Certainly not. God gives us bread to eat, but He
does not present it to us. A man sows seed in the ground and he sees
to it and he harvests it and it is threshed and prepared and placed
before us in the shape of flour, but we have no disposition to deny
that it is the gift of God. If it were not for God's goodness we should
have no bread. If it were not for the gift of God we could not attend
to the ordinance that brings remission of sins. We have not power,
of ourselves, to bring within our reach a single saving principle
belonging to the plan of eternal life. It is all God's free gift. It is
all in consequence of His mercy, and His charity, and His goodness and
love, and pleasure manifested to us that we have any privilege at all
that will help to make us better, or that will bring us into His Church
and kingdom and give us a right to say that we are really His children.
The fact that He has laid down ordinances, through which a remission of
sins is brought to us does not warrant us in saying that we do it of
ourselves, and when people talk like this it is likely to deceive.

"Now, my friends, the Bible says, in the place I have quoted, that
baptism is for the remission of sins. Do we believe this? If we do, you
know, we must also come to the conclusion necessarily that we cannot
have a remission of sins without it. If God has placed the ordinance
of baptism in His Church, as part of His divine system for a certain
purpose, the object cannot be obtained without it. The means which
God reveals for certain purposes must be used. We cannot say, and it
would be unreasonable in us to say, that when God speaks from heaven
in regard to any particular thing, we can ignore His advice when we
please and accept something that suits us. It is wrong, and it is this
disposition that has led to the present deplorable state of things.

"'Well,' says one, 'I have thought that baptism was for an outward sign
of an inward grace, or of membership in the Church.' Another error, you
see! The Bible does not say anything about that. Of course the act of
a person embracing the principles of the gospel and becoming a member
of the Church, may be a sign, but baptism was not set in the Church
for that purpose. It was taught in the Church and administered for the
remission of sins and nothing else. And no man or woman can obtain a
place in God's kingdom, or enjoy His presence here or hereafter, unless
their sins are washed away in baptism, as Paul's were washed away when
he accepted the advice of the good and inspired man, Ananias, who
instructed him.

"When I think of the importance of this offer which God has made, my
heart is filled with thankfulness instead of a disposition to discard
what He has taught. It is strange, and we can only account for it
on the ground of the waywardness of men naturally, to think that we
would attempt to do things in opposition to the will of God. Is there
a more important blessing offered to mankind than the remission of
sins? Have we any hope of enjoying the glory of God in our present
sinful condition? Surely not, for nothing sinful or unholy can enter
the courts of glory. Then if God has so put in His Church an ordinance
for the purpose of enabling us, like Saul, to wash away our sins,
why not be prepared to receive it with joy instead of cultivating or
encouraging a disposition to ignore it?

"Baptism for the remission of sins is the third principle of the gospel
of Christ. Then comes the ordinance of the laying on of hands for the
gift of the Holy Ghost. Peter says, on the day of Pentecost, to which
we have directed your attention, 'And ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost.' What did that consist of? The gift of God's Spirit.
The reception of God's power, a portion of His power. The reception
of an influence which leads those who possess it near to God in their
feelings and in their faith. A feeling which produces not only that
inward consciousness of acceptance with God as His son or daughter, but
a power which gives outward manifestations of its divinity. Jesus did
promise to the apostles when he sent them out first, that 'These signs
shall follow them that believe.' Here are His words, 'Go ye into all
the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved. He that believeth not shall be damned,
_and these signs shall follow them that believe_.' The words of Christ,
in the last chapter of Mark, 15th and following verses.

"'Well,' says one, 'you know we do not believe in miracles now. These
signs were miracles, but we do not believe in them now.' That may be,
my friends. This is the very reason why we are here, because there is
such a great disbelief in the Bible; because there is a disposition to
ignore the Bible; because there is a disposition to ignore the promises
of Christ; and we wish to show you the things that are denied; we wish
to point out to you the doctrines our fathers have denied; that our
teachers have denied, and we wish to show you that they are in the
Bible, the word of God, in the book which some have gone so far as to
assert that we do not believe in. But is it true that the promises of
God were fulfilled anciently in regard to this matter? Yes! In the 19th
chapter and 7th verse of the Acts of the Apostles, you will find an
instance related of the Apostles laying their hands on some that had
been baptized, and they spake with tongues. This was one of the gifts
that was manifested, in consequence of their receiving that spirit
which produced them. See also Mark 16th and 20th.

You must not consider that, in teaching these doctrines, we are
advancing something of ourselves, something new. If we were teaching
new doctrine you would have a right to call us to account and ask us
for the proof. We are teaching old doctrine. We are teaching the New
Testament doctrines, instead of those of our Christian friends. We
have no spirit of enmity in the least degree, towards any living soul,
and when we refer to the faith of our Christian friends remember, it
is simply to make the difference between their views and ours more
distinct to you. I say instead of our friends calling us to account,
it is the Latter-day Saints who have the right to come out and say to
their Christian friends, 'See here, why do you deny signs which Christ
said should follow believers? What believers did Christ speak about?
Why believers in His gospel, He taught us that these signs should
follow believers. Well then, if our Christian friends deny that, we
have the right to call them to account. If Christ said that these
miracles manifestations of Almighty power should follow the believers,
I say what reason have you to deny it? The question is not now whether
the Latter-day Saints possess the power or not. The question at issue
at present is not whether the teachers of the Church of England have
the power or not. The question is, Does Christ promise that power
to believers in the gospel? I say He does, and I say that those who
deny that such powers should follow believers, teach that which is
contrary to the word of Christ and contrary to the facts that appeared
in connection with the teachings and administration of the doctrines
of Christ. So that it is not the Latter-day Saints that introduce a
new doctrine, and we say to our friends, Hear us, we beseech you. Hear
the message we have to deliver, for God has sent us to teach the old
religion, the religion of Jesus, the simple plan which was revealed
from heaven in ancient days, to save the children of men.

"Peter said, on the day of Pentecost, speaking of the gospel and its
attendant blessings, 'for this promise is unto you.' That is, to the
people who stood before him, 'to your children and unto all that are
afar off even as many as the Lord our God shall call.'

"You see it was not confined to the members of the church in the first
place, as some would have us believe. The promise of the laying on of
hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost was made to the children of those
who heard Peter, and to all who were afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God should call. And if it be true that God is calling sinners to
repentance now, we should see the same power manifested today, that is,
if we have the true gospel. There can be no doubt of this.

"Which will you have, my friends, the doctrine of the Bible or the
doctrines of men? If you accept the doctrines of the Bible you will
have to become Latter-day Saints, and of course that would be out
of the question for a good many. But we cannot find these doctrines
anywhere else, and that is a perplexity. What shall we do about them?
When I am speaking to you I think of the position I occupied myself,
when I heard the Latter-day Saints first. I went to their meeting, not
expecting to hear anything that would interest me by any means, but I
heard the Bible doctrine taught. I could not deny it. I found I had
been mistaken. I did not incline in my heart to fight against God,
but considerations came up. If I become a Latter-day Saint, people
will call me a Mormon. If I embrace these doctrines, my friends will
point at me the finger of scorn. If I become a Latter-day Saint my
good neighbors will say I am deceived and led astray, and that I have
embraced a doctrine that is in opposition to the teachings of Christ.
Of course these things flashed through my mind when I considered and
read the Bible to ascertain positively whether these Mormons taught
the truth or not. I thought this--well! I have been religious for the
purpose of making my peace with God, but I have been mistaken and led
astray by men whom God had not sent to preach the gospel; but now I
have found the truth, the old promises relating to God's power, all
things as at the beginning, have been restored, and I have the promise
of obtaining a place with the righteous, according to the mind and will
of my Heavenly Father. Let friends say what they please, let them say
I am deceived, but I believe this Bible is true. Let them say whatever
they may in regard to my faith; no matter. I thought of the time of
Christ. They called Christ hard names; and of the Apostles they spake
a great deal of evil. In fact the Bible says they called them all
manner of evil, and although I expected my friends would denounce me,
still when I thought of what Christ had suffered, I was reconciled and
instead of fighting against God, I was willing to accept His doctrine,
in order to obtain His blessings.

"I state to you my friends that since the day I entered this Church I
have rejoiced exceedingly. I have found proofs upon proofs. I have had
reason to rejoice in consequence of the manifestations of God's power,
confirmatory of the doctrines, and I can say that the Church of Christ
is set up, its doctrines are taught, its practices are practiced, its
promises are fulfilled, and the evidences of its divine power are
manifested in the midst of this people.

"I would like to say a few words in regard to another point. I have
just said that I had been taught a religion by men whom God _had not
sent_. I would like to explain. You will excuse us if we seem to be
very extreme in our views. We have taken the liberty to teach you the
truth, just as we have it, and when we say something that comes in
contact with what you have received, excuse us. There is no bad feeling
at all, or unfriendliness in the least. But we believe in persons
being invested with the proper authority to preach the gospel. Paul
says, speaking of the authority of the Holy Priesthood, 'No man taketh
this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron.'
(Heb. v: 4.) 'Faith cometh by hearing, and how can we hear without a
preacher?' (Rom. x: 14-17. ) 'No man taketh this honor unto himself,
except he be called of God as was Aaron.' Now that is very plain,
and what does it mean? Simply what it says. That no man has a right
to administer in the ordinances of religion except he be sent of God
as was Aaron, for how can a man preach except he be sent? (Rom. x:
15.) If that be admitted, of course the next question of importance
is, How was Aaron sent? By turning to the history we have of God's
dealing with Moses, in reference to the gathering of the Israelites,
from Egpyt, you will find that God instructed Moses to call Aaron to
be his helper. (Ex. iv: 15, 16.) Here is the proof. No man can preach
the gospel simply because he feels inclined within himself to be a
preacher. No man can preach the gospel--that is with God's approval and
authority--unless God commission him. God commissioned every one of his
preachers in ancient times. He spoke from heaven. He directed those who
held this authority to call others. Christ called the Apostles as He
was called. His Father called Him; He called the Apostles, and He said,
'As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.' (St. John xx: 21). 'He
that receiveth you receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth Him
that sent me.' The authority was here, you see. God called Moses; He
instructed Moses to call Aaron; so that Aaron stood exactly in the same
relation to God as did the Apostles; the latter being called of God the
Father through Christ. That would be evident, because one whom God had
authorized to act as His servant was instructed by Him to call Aaron.
Now, you observe, no man has a right to exercise the authority of the
priesthood unless he is called of God as was Aaron.

"Are the preachers--those who commonly preach in connection with the
churches of the present day called of God as was Aaron? Or, in other
words, are they called by revelation from God? This is the question.
We do not doubt the propriety of their being called in this way,
because the Bible says they ought to be. Do our Protestant ministers,
at the present time, profess to be sent of God as was Aaron? Is there
a minister connected with the Christian denominations of the present
day who professes to be sent of God by direct revelation? Not one. It
does not require any argument at all. They do not profess that they
have heard from God. They say that God has not spoken since the last
book of the New Testament was written. They say it is a sin, and they
find fault with the Latter-day Saints because we believe that God does
speak; that He has a right to speak; and it is necessary we should have
His approval and commission in order to qualify us to attend to the
business of His Church. So that our present Christian teachers do not
profess to be called of God as was Aaron. They deny all revelation at
present, or since the Bible was written.

"You know the ministers, among their other errors, receive pay for
preaching. That is an innovation also. The ancient apostles, and
seventies, and bishops, and so on, were not paid for preaching. But
our present ministers are. The preachers of this Church, with whom I
am connected, are not paid for preaching. They preach without money,
without purse, and without scrip. Now the preachers of the present
churches make a business of preaching. They learn to be preachers.
They are brought up to be preachers in consequence of their parents
or guides finding in this way a place where they may make a living.
Such ministers sometimes acknowledge one kind of revelation. Not
that God tells the people about His will, or that He manifests His
power, but they sometimes tell us they have received a call from
one congregation to another. But there is one peculiarity about it,
viz: the congregation that calls them is a congregation that almost
invariably offers them more money than the congregation to which they
have been attached. This is the only instance of any kind of revelation
being acknowledged by our Christian teachers. God has not spoken,
say they, by inspired men, since the days of the ancient apostles.
He has not spoken directly to the church. He has not authorized a
single man to preach, but sometimes a call is given from less money to
more. And though they are feeling full of love and affection for the
congregation with which they have labored for years, yet they are sorry
and regret so much that that call must be heeded, which takes them from
among their old friends to a new congregation. But, you see, the new
congregation offers the most money, and that cannot be disregarded.

"My friends, these are a few of the doctrines of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. Are we displeased with anybody? No, not at
all. All are at liberty to believe what they please. But we are placed
under obligations to deliver the message which God has sent. We say we
are not solely dependent on the Bible, because God has sent the gospel.
We do not wish you to think that we regard the Bible lightly. Of course
you will have noticed, from our remarks, that this is not so. But we
say from the Bible alone we could not have discovered the true way of
life, any more than thousands of our friends have been able to do so.
Why millions of people have read the Bible but have not discovered some
of these doctrines. They have been lead to preach the things contained
therein, and if they had discovered the doctrine, this Bible cannot lay
on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. That part of the work that is
necessary for man's salvation must be done by one whom God authorizes.
Therefore the Bible alone is not sufficient. It contains the truth. It
is the word of God. It contains the instruction of the apostles. But it
does not contain the divine authority that is necessary to commission a
man to baptize or administer in any ordinance pertaining to the house
of God.

"Now, my friends, may God bless you. And my brethren and sisters, may
the Holy Spirit, which leads unto all truth, abide upon us, and may we
who have found the truth have a disposition to retain it. May we have
the moral courage to say, 'Let God be served. Let His truth be obeyed.'
Let the Almighty be honored, and if other people choose to follow their
own fancies, or the deceptions presented before them by men whom God
has not sent, as for us and our house, let us serve God.

"May God bless us, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."



CHAPTER XIV.

MR. BROWN'S LETTER TO THE MARSHALLS.

Mr. Brown soon became acquainted with a number of leading Mormon Elders
who in formed him more concerning the history of the peculiar people,
among whom he was a visitor. The sights in and around the city were
viewed by him, and he had time to inspect the most important buildings
and places of interest. According to promise, he wrote a letter to the
Marshalls giving some of his impressions of the country and the people,
and his epistle is here reproduced in full:

DEAR FRIENDS:

"I am at length in the land of the Mormons in the city of the Saints
by the dead sea of America. I have been well received, and am pleased
beyond measure with what I have seen and heard.

"It is a wonderful West. Our country as a whole surpasses the
inexperienced conception of Europeans, and places their cramped-up
districts, and tiny, although beautiful nations, in the position of
play-things when compared with the vastness of America--rustic, rough,
and rude as even its oldest places appear. Then what shall we say of
the wide West--until recently an unknown region--with its variety
of natural wonders, its wild mountains, appalling peaks and lonely
valleys, industries, mines of wealth, gorges, streams, plains! It is
grand, notwithstanding its development is yet in its infancy. Its
possibilities for future greatness are inconceivable even to the hardy
pioneer.

"We came over the Chicago Rock Island and Pacific Railway from Kansas
City, _via_ Denver. The State of Kansas, with its beautiful eastern
cities, and its wonderful plains and new and thriving settlements in
the western part, was presented to our view from the comfortable palace
coaches of this well-equipped road.

"From Denver, where one sees the Rocky Mountains, cloven with fantastic
ravines, and horrible chasms, dressed with rough and shaggy woods,
and capped with everlasting ice and snow, we proceeded to Pueblo,
and thence over the Denver & Rio Grande Railway, to Grand Junction,
Colorado. It is no exaggeration to say that the mountain scenery
along this route is the most magnificent in the world; while the
mid-continent region, which this road traverses, is doubtless the most
picturesque portion of our country. Very appropriately, this road, with
its western connection--the Rio Grande Western--has been named, 'The
Scenic Line.'

"Having passed Grand Junction, we soon enter Utah, and find ourselves
in a country of bluffs, cliffs, wonderful formations, and deserts,
which become wearisome in spite of the novelty of the scene. Nothing,
however, could be more romantic than the worn battlements and rocky
tablets, between which, for miles and miles, the road winds its way.
Nearing Castle Valley, we attained a higher level, where the cliffs
came nearer and were more precipitous, with the spaces between more
green.

"We are climbing towards the heights of the Wasatch--the western
bulwark of the Rockies just passed. Ahead is the Castle Gate, 'the most
inspiring as a single object, of all the marvelous scenes between the
plains and the Salt Sea.' We soon entered fairly into the Spanish Fork
Canyon, the sides of which are neither rough nor cliff-bound, but,
rather, are steep and rounded, covered with soft walls of greenery,
and groves of aspen and oak. Nearing the valley, we beheld Mt. Nebo,
over-topping other pyramids of the Wasatch range. Westward lies the
volcanic mountain ranges and the arid deserts of Utah and Nevada; but
at our feet, stretches forth a lovely valley, with the fresh, clear
waters of the Utah Lake in the center.

"We passed on through miles of fertile farmland, and between us and the
pretty lake were fine meadows, upon which sleek herds were grazing. A
semi-circle of Mormon settlements lie at the feet of the encompassing
hills, except upon the western side, where no water is found. Provo
is the largest of the cities in this valley. A short ride, and we
crossed the summit of a low mountain range, separating the valley, we
had just passed over, from the the Great Basin. The train followed
along the Jordan river which empties the waters of the Utah Lake into
the Great Salt Lake. Salt Lake Valley lies before us, with the city of
the Saints, and the wonderful saline sea to the north, the peaks of
the Wasatch, to the north and the east; and about us, on every side,
the marks of industry, thrift and prosperity, set in a framework of
surprisingly beautiful scenery.

"The valley is extremely pretty when seen at the best season of the
year. In autumn, when Nature, by the early frosts, has delicately
tinted the leaves with brilliant hues, the mountains and the hillsides
are very attractive; the contrast between the vegetation of the hills
and the colors of the valley, is an interesting feature in the panorama
spread before the delighted observer.

"Utah contains a population of about 200,000; it has an area of 85,000
square miles, much of which is mountains. The Great Salt Lake is about
forty by ninety miles in size, and contains several islands. Fish
abound in the numberless small streams that flow from and through the
picturesque canyons of the Wasatch.

"The sterility of the country was removed by a system of irrigation
from the mountain streams which fertilized the earth, causing it to
yield in abundance, and to 'blossom as the rose.'

"When you remember the population and the area, it will readily
appear that there is great room for more inhabitants, and yet it must
be remembered that only a small portion of the ground is fit for
cultivation, the greater part being wild hills or sandy desert. The
numerous valleys are like fruitful oases in a wilderness of rugged
mountains, which latter serve as reservoirs for the snows of winter,
that supply the summer rills with water.

"The valley, sometimes called the Great Basin, has an elevation of
from four to five thousand feet, being surrounded and intersected by
mountain ranges, which rise from five to seven thousand feet above the
level of the basin. The Wasatch range extends along the east side of
the valley; at its western base is a narrow strip of land, the most
fruitful in the Territory. In many other parts the soil is alkaline
and sterile. In other districts there are fertile basins, with soil
of good quality, yielding in places from fifty to ninety bushels of
grain to the acre. There are immense deposits of coal, iron, and other
valuable minerals, among them being gold, silver, copper, zinc, lead,
sulphur, alum and borax. Salt works have been established in different
places along the shores of the great lake, the water of which contains
about 16 per cent, solid matter, 97 per cent, of which is common salt.
In the chasms and ravines of the mountain streams are found cedar,
pine, quaking asp, oak and maple, but timber is difficult of access.
This, however, is compensated for by the immense deposits of coal in
the neighborhood, and in the Territory itself, and by the railroad
facilities the Territory now enjoys for shipping timber from Oregon and
California.

"The hardships of early times, which are now well-known in history,
have given way to prosperity, and the hidden resources of the hills
and dales are appearing to bless the children of the Mormon pioneer.
Thriving towns and cities extend from north to south, from east to
west, over the whole territory, and Mormon colonies are planted along
the Rocky Mountains, from Mexico in the south, to Canada in the north.
Their industry is proverbial; they view the building of cities, hamlets
and villages as a divine call, taking hold of the often perilous labor
with the invincible determination born of religious zeal and duty.

"Salt Lake City has a population of about fifty thousand, but it must
not be understood that all these are Mormons. The tide of prosperity
that has come to this people, has brought with it thousands of citizens
from all parts of the United States, until the population is as mixed,
in a religious sense, as that of any of the states of the Union;
churches of all the Christian denominations, the halls of the agnostic,
the synagogue of the Jew, and the gathering place of the infidel, are
alike represented.

"Among the buildings of interest, in Salt Lake City, is the tabernacle,
a remarkable edifice, and the great center of attraction. It was
completed in 1870, is an oval-shaped building, with a major diameter
of 233 feet, and a heighth of 70 feet, having a huge dome-shaped roof
resting on pillars of sand stone. It seats about nine thousand people,
and contains one of the largest organs in the world. Here services
are held every Sabbath, when the Elders of the Church, leaders of the
people, instruct the gathered thousands in the religion which, to my
mind, is the only scriptural on now preached, and certainly the only
one among them all having practical life and vitality. It contains the
germs of power that will leaven the whole religious world, scoff and
deride as they may.

"The famous temple, erected at a cost of several millions, begun in
1853, now nearly completed, is built of gray granite, with walls more
than six feet in thickness; It has a length of 200 and a width of 100
feet; the main walls rise to a height of 100 feet; there are three
towers and numerous minarets, on each end of the building, the center
east tower being surmounted by a figure representing an angel blowing a
trumpet, proclaiming the restoration of the gospel in the latter days.
The cap-stone was placed on this tower, amid great rejoicing, in April,
1892, when it was decided to finish the building, and dedicate it in
April, 1893, the occasion of the annual conference of the Church, which
is also the anniversary of its organization (April 6th, 1830) in New
York State, with six members. This great building is of elegant design,
grand proportions and unique pattern, a marvel of beauty, strength and
solidity. Temples, of which there are several in the Territory--one
in Logan, one in Manti, one in St. George--are designed for use in
performing holy ordinances for the living, and vicarious work by the
living for the dead, as you understand the faith of the Saints, and as
Elder Durant has often referred to and explained in his conversations
with you.

"A Stake is a division of the Church, presided over by a council of
three High Priests, and in Utah generally corresponds geographically
to the division of counties, while in other states and territories, it
often embraces larger districts. The stakes are divided into wards, in
each of which a bishop and his two counselors exercise supervision.
These again are subdivided into districts where presiding Elders or
teachers look after the interests of the Church members. There are
thirty-three stakes of Zion, with something over three hundred wards.
Each stake has a general assembly building, while each ward, besides,
has a structure for religious worship. The Assembly Hall, erected
at a cost of $90,000, dedicated January 9th, 1882, erected near the
temple, is the meeting place for the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. Much like
a church in appearance, it is 120 by 68 feet in size, seating three
thousand people, and is one of the most conspicuous buildings in the
city. The walls are built of rough-hewn granite taken from the same
quarrie that has supplied material for the temple.

"There are many other fine buildings in the city, besides natural
attractions, as, for instance, Garfield Beach, where bathing is the
pleasantest in America, the Hot Springs, the Warm Sulphur Springs, the
gas wells, etc. There are seventy miles of electric street railway,
and a hundred miles of streets. These avenues are 132 feet in width,
having in many places rows of shade trees on either side. Salt Lake
City covers as large an area as many other cities with five times its
population, and, excepting the business part, is largely composed of
villas.

"Other principal cities are Ogden, Logan and Provo. Ogden, thirty-seven
miles north of Salt Lake, is the railroad city of the territory, and
shows the results of the thrift and industry of its inhabitants on
every side. Many beautiful natural attractions surround it--its warm
springs and rugged canyons being admired by all who see them.

"But I have not space in this already long letter to describe the
mines, the manufacturing, industrial and commercial establishments
which abound in this city and in the territory. Neither can I take
time to more than merely refer to the schools, public and private,
and to the educational facilities of the people. It has often been
asserted that the Mormons are opposed to education, but the schools in
every hamlet and city bear witness to the falsity of the assertion.
No territory or state of the Union, of equal age with Utah, has finer
school buildings, or is more advanced in matters of education, and to
the Mormons may be ascribed the honor of having built and heartily
supported the system that has made this possible.

"I see on every side among the Mormons, people who are honest in their
convictions, who have a living faith and put their faith and teachings
into practice, who are industrious and thrifty, kind to the poor,
sober, virtuous. There are no signs of abject poverty anywhere in this
city, and much less among the hundreds of country settlements; idleness
is discountenanced by the Mormons, until among them as a people there
are no beggars, tramps or drones.

"A few more words, and I will not tire you with more this time. While,
of course, I do not agree with all the doctrines of the Church, I
consider the people as a whole are fair minded, and broad in their
views. I have met the chief men of the Mormon Church, and have had a
number of pleasant interviews with them. I find them men of grave and
reverend demeanor, very religions in thought and deed, but not given
to cant. They have not the sanctimonious airs that are so frequently
noticed in religious ministers. Wilford Woodruff is the present head
of the Church, the fourth man who has occupied that position--his
predecessors having been: Joseph Smith, Brigham Young and John Taylor.

"Mr. Woodruff is several years beyond four score, but is hale and
hearty, very affable in manner and interesting in conversation. He is
a man of sturdy build, with a kindly, honest, intelligent face, and a
manner especially winning and agreeable. You know that I have contended
that the leaders of this movement were insincere, but when I met them
and talked with them, when I marked the unwavering faith of that
good, venerable old man, I changed my mind. In some things, he may be
mistaken, but he is an honest worshipper of God.

"I must not close without remembering Mr. Durant to you. He was
overjoyed to find his family all well upon his arrival. During my stay
in this territory, I have remained at his home a part of the time, and
have been very kindly treated.

"With love to all, I am your friend,

"WALTER T. BROWN."



CHAPTER XV.

CONCLUSION.

Kind reader, a word before we separate: if you are not a member of
what is commonly called the Mormon Church, having read the foregoing
pages, you must certainly acknowledge that you know more concerning its
doctrines, from a Mormon standpoint, than you ever knew before.

We have tried to present to you, in a plain and very simple manner,
some of the first principles of our faith, the true gospel of Jesus
Christ. What do you think of them? Will they, or will they not, stand
scrutiny? It is left with you to answer, and as God has blessed you
with free agency, it is your privilege to judge and decide.

Do not treat these doctrines indifferently, nor carelessly throw them
aside. Should they be true, the message is of the utmost importance to
you. Surrounded with so many proofs, the faith of the Latter-day Saints
should demand your further investigation.

Books, tracts, and sermons, in great numbers, and within easy reach,
are at your command. Read, listen, investigate! Thousands have done so
before, and bear testimony to having received a knowledge of the divine
truth, as herein presented.

I part from you with the words of the poet true as any to be found:

  "Know this, that every soul is free,
  To choose his life and what he'll be,
  For this eternal truth is given,
  That God will force no man to heaven.

  "He'll call, persuade, direct aright--
  Bless him with wisdom, love, and light--
  In nameless ways be good and kind,
  But never force the human mind.

  "Freedom and reason make us men;
  Take these away, what are we then?
  Mere animals, and just as well
  The beasts may think of heaven or hell."



APPENDIX.

WHAT BRIGHAM YOUNG SAID.

It is not only a privilege, but a duty for the Saints to seek unto the
Lord their God for wisdom and understanding, to be in possession of the
spirit that fills the heavens, until their eyes are anointed and opened
to see the world as it really is, to know what it is made for, and why
all things are as they are. It is one of the most happifying subjects
that can be named, for a person, or people, to have the privilege of
gaining wisdom enough while in their mortal tabernacle, to be able to
look through the whys and wherefores of the existence of man, like
looking through a piece of glass that is perfectly transparent; and
understand the design of the Great Maker of this beautiful creation.
Let the people do this, and their hearts will be weaned from the
world.--Journal of Discourses Vol. I., p. 111.

This people are to the world an object of derision and hatred; to God,
of care and pity.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 350.

There is not a person in this community that can bring to mind or
mention the time when I exhibited one particle of sorrow or trouble to
them. I calculate to carry my own sorrows just as long as I live upon
this earth; and when I go to the grave, I expect them all to go there,
and sleep with me in silence.--Journal of Discourse, Vol I., p. 31.

If people act from pure motives, though their outward movements may not
always be so pleasant as our traditions would prefer, yet God will make
those acts result in the best good to the people.--J. of D. Vol. V., p.
256.

No man can be exalted unless he be independent.--Journal of Discourses,
Vol. I., p. 111.

There are but few of us but what have been honored with as convenient a
place for a birth as was Jesus.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 131.

You remember reading in the last book of the New Testament, that
in the beginning God cursed the earth; but did He curse all things
pertaining to it? No, He did not curse the water, but He blessed
it. Pure water is cleansing it serves to purify; and you are aware
that the ancient Saints were very tenacious with regard to their
purification by water. From the beginning the Lord instituted water for
that purpose among others. I do not mean from the beginning of this
earth alone; and although we have no immediate concern in inquiring
into the organization of other earths that do not come within reach
of our investigation, yet I will say that water has been the means
of purification in every world that has been organized out of the
immensity of matter.--J. of D. Vol. VII., p. 162.

The blood will not be resurrected with the body, being designed only to
sustain the life of the present organization. When this is dissolved
and we again obtain our bodies by the power of the resurrection, that
which we now call the life of the body, and which is formed from the
food we eat and the water we drink, will be supplanted by another
element; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.--J. of
D. Vol. VII., p. 163.

If we accept salvation on the terms it is offered to us, we have got to
be honest in every thought, in our reflections, in our meditations, in
our private circles, in our deal, in our declarations, and in every act
of our lives, fearless and regardless of every principle of error, of
every principle of falsehood that may be presented.--J. of D. Vol. V.,
p. 124.

There is no such thing as a man being truly rich until he has power
over death, hell, the grave, and him that hath the power of death,
which is the devil.--J. of D. Vol. I., p. 271.

All men should study to learn the nature of mankind, and to discern
that divinity inherent in them. A spirit and power of research is
planted within, yet they remain undeveloped.--J. of D. Vol. VII., p. 1.

I am hated for teaching people the way of life and salvation for
teaching them principles that pertain to eternity, by which the Gods
were and are, and by which they gain influence and power. Obtain that
influence, and you will be hated, despised, and hunted like the roe
upon the mountains.--J. of D. Vol. VII., p. 3.

Never accuse a man or a woman of evil, until you find out the cause.
Never judge by the outward appearance.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 169.

Do not get so angry that you cannot pray; do not allow yourselves to
become so angry that you cannot feed an enemy.--J. of D. Vol. V., p.
228.

Do not offend God by not doing as He wants you to.--J. of D. Vol. V.,
p. 236.

If you could crowd an individual or a community into heaven without
experience, it would be no enjoyment to them. They must know the
opposite; they must know how to contrast, in order to prize and
appreciate the comfort and happiness, the joy and the bliss they are
actually in possession of.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 294.

We have to learn to submit ourselves to the Lord with all our hearts,
with all our affections, wishes, desires, passions, and let Him reign
and rule over us and within us, the God of every nation; then He will
lead us to victory and glory; otherwise He will not.--J. of D. Vol. V.,
p. 352.

There is only one thing to fear, and that is, that you will not be
faithful to the kingdom of God.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 228.

My Christian brethren in the world say it is a piece of folly a species
of extreme nonsense, to believe that water will wash away sins. It is
no matter to me what they say; it is a commandment of the Lord; there
is no mistake in it, it tells for itself. He says, Do thus and so, and
your sins shall be washed away. I care not how they are taken away;
whether an angel takes them to the Lord to get forgiveness, whether
they sink to the bottom of the stream, or float on the top, and be
scattered to the four winds; He says, _Go into the water_ and be
baptized, and they shall be washed away; which is enough for me.--J. of
D. Vol. I., p. 239.

When the wicked have power to blow out the sun, that it shines no more;
when they have power to bring to a conclusion the operations of the
elements, suspend the whole system of nature, and make a footstool of
the throne of the Almighty, _they may then think to check, Mormonism
in its course_, and thwart the unalterable purposes of heaven. Men may
persecute the people who believe its doctrine, report and publish lies
to bring tribulation upon their heads, earth and hell may unite in
one grand league against it, and exert their malicious powers to the
utmost, but it will stand as firm and immovable in the midst of it all
as the pillars of eternity.--J. of D. Vol. I., p. 88.

The time will come when the kingdom of God will reign free and
independent. There will be a kingdom on the earth that will be
controlled upon the same basis, in part, as that of the Government
of the United States; and it will govern and protect in their rights
the various classes of men, irrespective of their different modes of
worship; for the law must go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem, and the Lord Jesus will govern every nation and kingdom
upon the earth.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 329.

Keep your spirits under the sole control of good spirits, and they will
make your tabernacles honorable in the presence of God, angels, and
men. If you will always keep your spirits in right subjection, you will
be watching all the time, and never suffer yourselves to commit an act
that you will be sorry for, and you can see that in all your life you
are clear. Do not do anything that you will be sorry for.--J. of D.
Vol. V., p. 328.

The Lord will not reveal all that we at times wish Him to. If a school
master were to undertake to teach a little child algebra, you would
call him foolish, would you not? Just so with our Father; He reveals to
us as we are prepared to receive.--J. of D. Vol. V., p. 330.

The philosophers of the world will concede that the elements of which
you and I are composed are eternal, yet they believe that there was a
time when there was no God.--J. of D, Vol. I, p. 5.

You will find that this probation is the place to increase upon every
little we receive, for the Lord gives line upon line to the children of
men. When He reveals the plan of salvation, then is the time to fill up
our days with good works.--J. of D., Vol. I, p. 5.

When you embark to fill up the end of your creation, never cease to
seek to have the Spirit of the Lord rest upon you, that your minds may
be peaceable, and as smooth as the summer breezes of heaven. Never
cease a day of your life to have the Holy Ghost resting upon you.--J.
of D., Vol, I, p. 69.

When I have served my God and my brethren, when I have performed every
act required of me, _until nothing remains to be done, but to lie down
and rest_, to seek recreation, then it becomes my lawful privilege, and
not before.--Journal of Discourses, Vol. I., p. 112.

If you want to apostatize, apostatize, and behave yourselves.--J. of
D., Vol. I, p. 84.

The duty of the mother is to watch over her children, and to give
them their early education, for impressions received in infancy are
lasting. You know, yourselves, by experience, that the impressions
you have received in the dawn of your mortal existence, bear, to this
day, with the greatest weight upon your mind. It is the experience of
people generally that what they imbibe from their mothers in infancy
is the most lasting upon the mind through life. This is natural, it is
reasonable, it is right. I do not suppose you can find one person among
five hundred who does not think his mother to be the best woman that
ever lived. This is right, it is planted in the human heart. The child
reposes implicit confidence in the mother, you behold in him a natural
attachment, no matter what her appearance may be, that makes him think
his mother is the best and handsomest mother in the world.--J. of D.,
Vol. I, p. 67.

I never passed John Wesley's church in London without stopping to
look at it. Was he a good man? Yes; I suppose him to have been, by
all accounts, as good as ever walked on this earth, according to his
knowledge. Has he obtained a rest? Yes, and greater than ever entered
his mind to expect; and so have thousands of others of the various
religious denominations.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 5.

Persecution and hatred by those who love not the truth are a legacy
bequeathed by the Savior to all his followers; for He said they
should be hated of all men for His name's sake. If we had ceased
to be persecuted and hated we might fear; but the prospect is
encouraging.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 42.

When I hear persons say that they ought to occupy a station more
exalted, than they do, and hide the talents they are in possession of,
they have not the true wisdom they ought to have. There is a lack in
them, or they would improve upon the talents given.--J. of D., Vol.
VII., p. 162.

Take a course to let the Spirit of God leave your hearts, and every
soul of you would apostatize.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 55.

Truth is obeyed when it is loved. Strict obedience to the truth will
alone enable people to dwell in the presence of the Almighty.--J. of
D., Vol. VII., p. 55.

When men come into this Church merely through having their judgments
convinced, they still must have the Spirit of God bearing witness to
their spirits, or they will leave the Church, as sure as they are
living beings. The Saints must become one, as Jesus said His disciples
should be one. They must have the Spirit testifying to them of the
truth, or the light that is in them will become darkness, and they
will forsake this kingdom and their religion. I wished to bear this
testimony.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 55.

There will not be so many people that will go into that awful place
that burns with fire and brimstone, where they sink down, down, down to
the bottom of the bottomless pit, as the Christians say, not near so
many as the Christian world would have go there. That gives me great
joy, notwithstanding all the perils and persecution we have suffered
through the wickedness of the wicked. Liars, sorcerers, whoremongers,
adulterers, and those that love and make a lie, will be found on the
outside of the walls of the city; but they will never get into the
bottom of the bottomless pit. Who will go there and become angels
of perdition and suffer the wrath of an offended God? Those who sin
against the Holy Ghost.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 144.

The eloquence of angels never can convince any person that God lives,
and makes truth the habitation of His throne, independent of that
eloquence being clothed with the power of the Holy Ghost; in the
absence of this, it would be a combination of useless sounds.--J. of
D., Vol. I., p. 90.

Embrace a doctrine that will purge sin and iniquity from your hearts,
and sanctify you before God, and you are right, no matter how others
act.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 78.

Every time you kick "Mormonism," you kick it up stairs: you never kick
it down stairs. The Lord Almighty so orders it.--J. of D., Vol. VII.,
p. 145.

If you want to see the principle of devilism to perfection, hunt among
those who have once enjoyed the faith of the holy gospel and then
forsaken their religion. We have the best and the worst.--J. of D.,
Vol. VII,, p. 145.

Darkness and sin were permitted to come on this earth. Man partook of
the forbidden fruit in accordance with a plan devised from eternity,
that mankind might be brought in contact with the principles and powers
of darkness, that they might know the bitter and the sweet, the good
and the evil, and be able to discern between light and darkness, to
enable them to receive light continually.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p, 158.

I will not say, as do many, that the more I learn the more I am
satisfied that I know nothing; for the more I learn the more I discern
an eternity of knowledge to improve upon.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 162.

This American continent will be Zion, for it is so spoken of by the
prophets. Jerusalem will be rebuilt and will be the place of gathering,
and the tribe of Judah will gather there; but this continent of America
is the land of Zion.--J. of D., Vol. V., p. 4.

One-third part of the spirits that were prepared for this earth
rebelled against Jesus Christ, and were cast down to the earth, and
they have been opposed to him from that day to this, with Lucifer at
their heard. He is their great General Lucifer, the Son of the Morning,
He was once a brilliant and influential character in heaven, and we
will know more about him hereafter.--J. of D., Vol. V., p. 55.

It is the man who works hard, who sweats over the rock, and goes to the
canyons for lumber, that I count more worthy of good food and dress
than I am.--J. of D., Vol. V., p. 99.

Chastisements are grievous when they are received; but if they are
received in patience, they will work out salvation for those who
cheerfully submit to them.--J. of D., Vol. V., p. 124.

Mourning for the righteous dead springs from the ignorance and weakness
that are planted within the mortal tabernacle, the organization of
this house for the spirit to dwell in. No matter what pain we suffer,
no matter what we pass through, we cling to our mother earth, and
dislike to have any of her children leave us. We love to keep together
the social family relation that we bear one to another, and do not
like to part with each other; but could we have knowledge and see into
eternity, if we were perfectly free from the weakness, blindness and
lethargy with which we are clothed in the flesh, we should have no
disposition to weep or mourn.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 131.

First reform in your moral character and conduct one towards another,
so that every man and woman will deal honestly and walk uprightly with
one another, and extend the arm of charity and benevolence to each
other, as necessity requires. Be moral and strictly honest in every
point, before you ask God to reform your spirit.--J. of D., Vol. IV.,
p. 61.

If we could see our heavenly Father, we should see a being similar
to our earthly parent, with this difference: our Father in heaven is
exalted and glorified. He has received His thrones, His principalities
and powers, and He sits as a governor, as a monarch, and overrules
kingdoms, thrones and dominions that have been bequeathed to Him, and
such as we anticipate receiving. While He was in the flesh, as we are,
He was as we are.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 54.

When we have done with the flesh, and have departed to the spirit
world, you will find that we are independent of those evil spirits. But
while you are in the flesh you will suffer by them, and cannot control
them, only by your faith in the name of Jesus Christ and by the keys of
the eternal priesthood. When the spirit is unlocked from the tabernacle
it is as free, pure, holy and independent of them as the sun is of this
earth.--J. of D. Vol. IV,, p. 134.

The spirit of every man and woman that gets into the celestial kingdom
must overcome the flesh, must war against the flesh until the seeds of
sin that are sown in the flesh are brought into subjection to the law
of Christ.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p, 197.

Natural philosophy is the plan of salvation, and the plan of salvation
is natural philosophy.--J. of D. Vol. IV., p. 203.

There is no spirit but what was pure and holy when it came here from
the celestial world. There is no spirit among the human family that
was begotten in hell; none that were begotten by angels, or by any
inferior being. They were not produced by any being less than our
Father in heaven. He is the Father of our spirits, and if we could
know, understand and do His will, every soul would be prepared to
return back into His presence. And when they get there, they would see
that they had formerly lived there for ages; that they had previously
been acquainted with every nook and corner, with the palaces, walks
and gardens; and they would embrace their Father, and He would embrace
them.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 268.

The kingdom of our God that is set upon the earth, does not require men
of many words and flaming oratorical talents, to establish truth and
righteousness. It is not the many words that accomplish the designs of
our Father in heaven; with Him it is the acts of the people more than
their words.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 20.

We are placed on this earth to prove whether we are worthy to go into
the celestial world, the terrestrial or the telestial, or to hell.--J.
of D., Vol. IV., p. 269.

Serve God according to the best knowledge you have, and lie down and
sleep quietly; and when the devil comes along and says, You are not
a very good Saint, you might enjoy greater blessings and more of the
power of God, and have the vision of your mind opened, if you would
live up to your privileges, tell him to leave; that you have long ago
forsaken his ranks and enlisted in the army of Jesus, who is your
captain, and that you want no more of the devil.--J. of D., Vol. IV.,
p. 270.

The spirit of truth will do more to bring persons to light and
knowledge than flowery words.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 21.

Many people are unwilling to do one thing for themselves in case of
sickness, but ask God to do it all.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 25.

I would rather be chopped to pieces at night, and resurrected in the
morning each day throughout a period of three score years and ten, than
be deprived of speaking freely, or be afraid of doing so.--J. of D.,
Vol. I., p. 364.

A man never can be a polished scoundrel, until he can figure in
polished society. It proves the truth of the saying, that it takes all
the revelations of God, and every good principle in the world to make a
man perfectly ripe for hell.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 362.

Let the past experience be buried in the land of forgetfulness, if the
Lord will; but if this is done at all, it will be by showing kindness
towards us in the future. If they wish us to forget the past, let them
cease to make and circulate falsehoods about us, and let all the good
people of the Government say,--"_Let us do this people good for the
future, and not try to crush them down all the day long by continuing
to persecute them_."

If we are here by chance, if we happened to slip into this world from
nothing, we shall soon slip out of this world to nothing, hence nothing
will remain.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 60.

The devil is just as much opposed to Jesus now as he was when the
revolt took place in heaven. And as the devil increases his numbers by
getting the people to be wicked, so Jesus Christ increases His numbers
and strength by getting the people to be humble and righteous. The
human family are going to the polls by and by, and they wish to know
which party is going to carry the day.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 38.

If we are a company of poor, ignorant, deluded creatures why do they
not show us a better example?--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 365.

If children have sinned against their parents, or husbands against
their wives, or wives against their husbands, let them confess their
faults one to another and forgive each other, and there let the
confession stop; and then let them ask pardon from their God. Confess
your sins to whoever you have sinned against, and let it stop there.

If you have committed a sin against the community, confess to them. If
you have sinned in your family, confess there.

Confess your sins, iniquities and follies where that confession
belongs, and learn to classify your actions.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 79.

Nothing less than the privilege of increasing eternally, in every
sense of the word, can satisfy the immortal spirit. If the endless
stream of knowledge from the eternal fountain could all be drunk in by
organized intelligence, so sure immortality would come to an end, and
all eternity be thrown upon the retrograde path.--J. of D., Vol. I., p.
350.

God is our Father, and Jesus Christ is our elder brother, and both are
our everlasting friends.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 193.

The only true believers are they who prove their belief by their
obedience to the requirements of the gospel.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 234.

A flock of sheep consisting of thousands must be clean indeed if some
of them are not smutty.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 213.

The gospel of salvation is perfectly calculated to cause division.
It strikes at the root of the very existence of mankind in their
wickedness, evil designs, passions and wicked calculations. There is
no evil among the human family, but at the foundation of which it
strikes effectually, and comes in contact with every evil passion that
rises in the heart of man. It is opposed to every evil practice of
men, and consequently it disturbs them in the wicked courses they are
pursuing.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 235.

The God Mr. Baptist believes in is without body, parts or passions. The
God that his "brother Mormon" believes in is described in the Bible
as being a personage of tabernacle, having eyes to see, for he that
made the eye shall he not see? Having ears to hear, for his ears are
open to hear the prayers of the righteous. He has limbs that He can
walk, for the Lord God walked in the garden in the cool of the day. He
conversed with His children, as in the case of Moses at the fiery bush,
and with Abraham on the plains of Mamre. He also ate and drank with
Abraham and others. That is, the God the Mormons believe in, but their
very religious Christian brethren do not believe in the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, which is the God the Bible sets forth, as an organized
corporeal being.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 238.

It is a mistaken idea to suppose that others can prevent me from
enjoying the light of God in my soul; all hell cannot hinder me from
enjoying Zion in my own heart, if my individual will yields obedience
to the requirements and mandates of my heavenly Master.--J. of D., Vol.
I., p. 311.

Children have all confidence in their mothers; and if mothers would
take proper pains, they can instill into the hearts of their children
what they please. You will, no doubt, recollect reading, in the Book
of Mormon, of two thousand young men, who were brought up to believe
that, if they put their whole trust in God, and served Him no power
would overcome them. You also recollect reading of them going out to
fight, and so bold were they, and so mighty their faith, that it was
impossible for their enemies to slay them. This power and faith they
obtained through the teachings of their mothers.--J. of D., Vol. I., p.
67.

That moment that men seek to build up themselves, in preference to the
kingdom of God, and seek to hoard up riches, while the widow and the
fatherless, the sick and afflicted around them are in poverty and want,
it proves that their hearts are weaned from their God.--J. of D., Vol.
I., p. 273.

It is as much as we can do to keep the Christians of the nineteenth
century from cutting our throats because we differ from them in our
religious belief.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 165.

If I could net master my mouth, I would my knees, and make them bend
until my mouth would speak.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 164.

All who live according to the best principles in their possession, or
that they can understand, will receive peace, glory, comfort, joy, and
a crown that will be far beyond what they are anticipating. They will
not be lost.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 192.

I will not ask any person to embrace anything that is not in the New
Testament until they have asked God if it is true or untrue, who will
satisfy them if they ask in faith nothing doubting.--J. of D., Vol. I.,
p. 244.

Do not seek for that which you cannot magnify, but practice upon that
which you have in your possession.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 239.

It would be as easy for a gnat to trace the history of man back to his
origin as for man to fathom the first cause of all things, lift the
veil of eternity, and reveal the mysteries that have been sought after
by philosophers from the beginning. What, then, should be the calling
and duty of the children of men? Instead of inquiring after the origin
of the Gods instead of trying to explore the depths of eternities
that have been, that are, and that will be instead of endeavoring to
discover the boundaries of boundless space, let them seek to know
the object of their present existence, and how to apply, in the most
profitable manner for their mutual good and salvation, the intelligence
they possess.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 284.

The being whom we call Father was the father of the spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and He was also His father pertaining to the flesh.
Infidels and Christians, make all you can of this statement. The Bible,
which all Christians profess to believe, reveals that fact, and it
reveals the truth upon that point, and I am a witness of its truth. The
apostles who were personally acquainted with Jesus Christ did know and
understand what they wrote, and they wrote the truth.--J. of D., Vol.
VII., p. 286.

When the spirit leaves the body it goes into the spirit world, where
the spirits of men are classified according to their own wills or
pleasure, as men are here, only they are in a more pure and refined
state of existence.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p 288.

Salvation is an individual operation. I am the only person that can
possibly save myself.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 312.

There is _not a truth on earth or in heaven that is not embraced in
Mormonism_.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 244.

I am here to testify to hundreds of instances of men, women and
children being healed by the power of God through the laying on of
hands: and many I have seen raised from the gates of death, and brought
back from the verge of eternity; and some whose spirits had actually
left their bodies, returned again. I testify that I have seen the sick
healed by the laying on of hands, according to the promise of the
Savior.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 240.

There never was a time when there were not Gods and worlds, and when
men were not passing through the same ordeals that we are now passing
through. That course has been from all eternity and it is and will be
to all eternity.--J. of D, Vol. VII., p. 333.

When you tell me that Father Adam was made as we make adobies, from the
earth, you tell me what I deem an idle tale. When you tell me that the
beasts of the field were produced in that manner, you are speaking idle
words, devoid of meaning. There is no such thing in all the eternities
where the Gods dwell; mankind are here because they are the offspring
of parents who were first brought here from another planet, and power
was given them to propagate their species, and they were commanded to
multiply and replenish the earth.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 285.

We will round up our shoulders and bear up the ponderous weight, carry
the gospel to the uttermost parts of the earth, gather Israel, redeem
Zion and continue our operations until we bind Satan, and the kingdoms
of this world become the kingdom of our Lord and His Christ, and no
power can hinder it.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 189.

The "Mormon" Elders will tell you that all people must receive this
gospel the gospel of Jesus Christ, and be baptized for the remission
of sins, or they cannot be saved. Let me explain this to you. They
cannot go where God and Christ dwell, for that is a kingdom of itself
the celestial kingdom. Jesus said, "In my Father's house are many
mansions," or kingdoms. They will come forth in the first, second or
some other resurrection, if they have not been guilty of the particular
sins I have just mentioned; and they will enjoy a kingdom and a glory
greater than they had ever anticipated. When we talk about people's
being damned, I would like to have all understand that we do not use
the term "damnation" in the sense that it is used by the sectarian
world. Universal, salvation or redemption is the doctrine of the Bible;
but the people do not know how or where to discriminate between truth
and error. All those who have done according to the best of their
knowledge, whether they are Christians, Pagans, Jews, Mohammedans, or
any other class of men that have ever lived upon the earth, that have
dealt honestly and justly with their fellow beings, walked uprightly
before each other, loved mercy, tried to put down iniquity, and done as
far right as they knew how, according to the laws they lived under, no
matter what the laws were, will share in a resurrection that will be
glorious far beyond the conception of mortals.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p.
288.

Do you not know that the possession of your property is like a shadow,
or the dew of the morning before the noonday sun, that you cannot have
any assurance of its control for a single moment? It is the unseen hand
of Providence that controls it.--J. of D. Vol. I., p. 114.

No person can be a saint, unless he receives the holy gospel, for the
purity, justice, holiness, and eternal duration of it.--J. of D. Vol.
I., p. 114.

I will do the work the Lord has appointed unto me. You do the same and
fear not, for the Lord manages the helm of the ship of Zion; and on any
other ship I do not wish to be.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 189.

How often to all human appearance, has this kingdom been blotted out
from the earth, but the Lord has put His hand over the people, and it
has passed through and come out two, three and four times larger than
before. Our enemies have kicked us, and cuffed us, and driven us from
pillar to post, and we have multiplied and increased the more, until we
have become what we are this day.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 191.

The devil has put the whole world on the watch against us. It is
impossible for us to make the least move without exciting, if not all
the world, at least a considerable portion of it. They are excited at
what we do, and strange to relate, they are no less excited at what we
do not do.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 189.

Do you suppose that this people will ever see the day that they will
rest in perfect security, in hopes of becoming like another people,
nation, state, kingdom or society? They never will. Christ and
Satan never can be friends. Light and darkness will always remain
opposites.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 188.

When evil is present with us, we must overcome it, or be overcome by
it. When the devil is in our hearts, tempting us to do that which is
wrong, we must resist him, or be led captive by him.--J. of D., Vol,
I., p. 92.

The speculation I am after, is to exchange this world, which, in
its present state, passes away, for a world that is eternal and
unchangeable, for a glorified world filled with eternal riches, for the
world that is made an inheritance for the Gods of eternity.--J. of D.,
Vol. I., p. 327.

Do the righteous of this people cause persecution to come upon
themselves? No, Do the principles of the gospel create prejudice and
persecution against them? No. But it is the disposition of the wicked
to oppose the principles of truth and righteousness which causes
it.--J. of D., Vol. I. p. 186.

To saint and sinner, believer and unbeliever, I wish here to offer one
word of advice and counsel by revealing the mystery that abides with
this people called Latter-day Saints; it is the Spirit of the living
God that leads them; it is the Spirit of the Almighty that binds them
together; it is the influence of the Holy Ghost that makes them love
each other like little children; it is the Spirit of Jesus Christ that
makes them willing to lay down their lives for the cause of truth, and
it was that same Spirit that caused Joseph, our martyred prophet to lay
down his life for the testimony of what the Lord revealed to him.--J.
of D., Vol. I., p. 145.

I have nothing to fear in all the persecutions or hardships I may pass
through in connection with this people, but the one thing, and that is
to stray from the religion I have embraced and be forsaken by my God.
If you or I should see that day, we shall see at once that the world
will love its own; and affliction, persecution, death, fire and the
sword will cease to follow us.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 144.

Money is not real capital, it bears the title only. True capital is
labor and is confined to the laboring classes. They only possess it. It
is the bone, sinew, nerve and muscle of man that subdue the earth, make
it yield its strength and administer to his varied wants. This power
tears down mountains and fills up valleys, builds cities and temples,
and paves the streets. In short what is there that yields shelter and
comfort to civilized man that is not produced by the strength of his
arm making the elements bend to his will.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 254.

Though the enemy had power to kill our _prophet_, that is, _kill his
body_, did he not accomplish all that was in _his heart_ to accomplish
in _his day_? He did to my certain knowledge, and I have many witnesses
here that heard him declare that he had done everything he could do--he
had revealed everything that could be revealed at _present_, he had
prepared the way for the people to walk in, and no man or woman should
be deprived of going into the presence of the Father and the Son and
enjoying an eternal exaltation if they would _walk in the path he had
pointed out_.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 132.

So long as you are able to walk and attend to your business, it is
folly to say that you need ardent spirits to keep you alive. The
constitution that a person has should be nourished and cherished; and
whenever we take anything into the system to force and stimulate it
beyond its natural capacity, it shortens life. I am physician enough to
know that. When you are tired and think you need a little spirituous
liquor, take some bread and butter, or bread and milk, and lie down and
rest. Do not labor so hard as to deem it requisite to get half drunk
in order to keep up your spirits. If you will follow this counsel, you
will be full of life and health, and will increase your intelligence,
your joy and comfort.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 337.

All I desire to live for is to see the inhabitants of the earth
acknowledge God, bow down to Him, and confess His supremacy, and
His righteous covenant. To Him let every knee bow, and every tongue
confess, and let all creation say Amen to His wise providences. Let
every person declare His allegiance to God, and then live to it,
saying, "As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. _As for me,
and all I have, it is the Lord's, and shall be dedicated to Him all my
days_." If this can be done, happiness is here, angels are here, God is
here and we are wrapped in the visions of eternity.--J. of D., Vol. I.,
p. 94.

The principle opposite to that of eternal increase from the beginning,
leads down to hell; the person decreases, loses his knowledge, tact,
talent and ultimately, in a short period of time is lost; he returns
to his mother earth, his name is forgotten. But where, O! where is his
spirit? I will not now take the time to follow his destiny; but here
strong language _could_ be used, for when the Lord Jesus Christ shall
be revealed after the termination of the thousand years' rest, He will
summon the armies of heaven for the conflict, He will come forth in
flaming fire, He will descend to execute the mandates of an incensed
God, and amid the thunderings of the wrath of Omnipotence, roll up the
heavens as a scroll and destroy death and him that has the power of it.
The rebellious will be thrown back into their native element, there to
remain myriads of years before their dust will again be revived, before
they will be reorganized. Some might argue that this principle would
lead to the reorganization of Satan, and all the devils. I say nothing
about this only what the Lord says, that when "He comes He will destroy
_death_ and him that has the power of it." It cannot be annihilated;
you cannot annihilate matter. If you could it would prove there was
empty space. If philosophers could annihilate the least conceivable
amount of matter, they could then prove there was the minutest vacuum,
or _empty space_ but there is not even that much, and it is beyond the
power of man to prove that there is any.--J of D., Vol. I., p. 118.

Because of the weakness of human nature, it must crumble to the dust.
But in all the revolutions and changes in the existence of men, in
the eternal world which they inhabit, and in the knowledge they have
obtained as people on the earth, there is no such thing as principle,
power, wisdom, knowledge, life, position or anything that can be
imagined, that remains stationary they must increase or decrease.--J.
of D., Vol. I., p. 350.

Men should act upon the principle of righteousness because it is right,
and is a principle which they love to cherish and see practiced by all
men. They should love mercy because of its benevolence, charity, love,
clemency and of all of its lovely attributes, and be inspired thereby
to deal justly, fairly, honorably, meting out to others their just
deservings.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 119.

Practical religion is what we all need to prepare us to enjoy that
which we have in our anticipations that which we hold in our faith.
Merely the theory of any religion does people but little good. This
is the great failing of Bible Christians, as they are called. They
have the theory of the religion of which the Bible testifies, but the
practical part they spurn from them.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 341.

All those who wish to possess true riches, desire the riches that will
endure. Then look at the subject of salvation where you will find
true riches. They are to be found in the principles of the gospel of
salvation, and are not to be found anywhere else.--J. of D., Vol. I.,
p, 269.

Suppose we say there was once a beginning to all things, then we
must conclude there will undoubtedly be an end. Can eternity be
circumscribed? If it can, there is an end of all wisdom, knowledge,
power and glory all will sink into eternal annihilation.--J. of D.,
Vol. I., p. 353.

Which would produce the greatest good to man, to give him his agency
and draw a vail over him, or to give him certain blessings and
privileges, let him live in a certain degree of light, and enjoy a
certain glory, and take his agency from him, compelling him to remain
in that position, without any possible chance of progress? I say the
greatest good that could be produced by the all-wise Conductor of the
universe to His creature, man, was to do just as He has done.--J. of
D., Vol. I., p. 351.

The Lord does not thank you for your alms, long prayers, sanctimonious
speeches and long faces, if you refuse to extend the hand of
benevolence and charity to your fellow creatures, and lift them up, and
encourage and strengthen the feeble, while they are contending against
the current of mortal ills.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 245.

The Holy Ghost takes of the Father and of the Son and shows it to the
disciples. It shows them things past, present and to come. It opens the
vision of the mind, unlocks the treasures of wisdom, and they begin to
understand the things of God; their minds are exalted on high; their
conceptions of God and His creations are dignified, and "Hallelujah to
God and the Lamb in the highest," is the constant language of their
hearts. They comprehend themselves and the great object of their
existence. They also comprehend the designs of the wicked ones, and
the designs of those who serve him; they comprehend the designs of the
Almighty in forming the earth and mankind upon it, and the ultimate
purpose of all His creations. It leads them to drink at the fountain
of eternal wisdom, justice and truth; they grow in grace and in the
knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ until they see as they
are seen, and know as they are known.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 241.

The character of a person is formed through life, to a greater or less
extent, by the teachings of the mother. The traits of early impressions
that she gives the child, will be characteristic points in his
character through every avenue of his mortal existence.--J. of D., Vol.
I., p. 67.

It is necessary that we should be tried, tempted and buffeted to make
us feel the weakness of this mortal flesh.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 359.

Directly behind a frowning Providence oftentimes are concealed the
greatest blessings that mankind can desire.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 198.

I am at the defiance of the rulers of the greatest nation on the earth,
with the United States all put together, to produce a more loyal people
than the Latter-day Saints.--J. of D., Vol. 1., p. 361.

All there is of any worth or value in the world is incorporated in our
glorious religion, and designed to exalt the minds of the children of
men to a permanent, celestial and eternal station.--J. of D., Vol. I.,
p. 341.

I may have thousands of wealth locked up today, and hold checks for
immense sums on the best banking institutions in the world, but have
I any surety that I shall be worth a cent tomorrow morning? Not the
least. The Lord Almighty can send fire and destruction when He pleases,
destroying towns and swallowing up cities in the bellowing earthquake.
He can set up kingdoms and make communities wealthy, and bring them
to poverty at His pleasure. When He pleases, He can give them wealth,
comfort and ease, and on the other hand torment them with poverty,
distress and sore afflictions. Who can realize this? All the world
ought, and especially the Saints.--J. of D., Vol. I, p. 340.

The Lord Almighty can do His own work and no power of man can stay the
potency of His wonder-working hand. Men may presume to dictate to the
Lord; they come to naught, but His work moves steadily forward.--J. of
D., Vol. I., p. 198.

When I cannot feed myself through the means God has placed in my power,
it is then time enough for Him to exercise His providence in an unusual
manner to administer to my wants. But while we can help ourselves, it
is our duty to do so. If a saint of God be locked up in prison, by
his enemies, to starve to death, it is then time enough for God to
interpose, and feed him.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 108.

It has been, and is now, believed by numerous individuals, that the
brute creation, by increase in knowledge and wisdom, change their
physical or bodily organization, through numerous states of existence,
so that the minutest insect, in lapse of time, can take to itself the
human form, and _visa versa_. This is one of the most inconsistent
ideas that could be possibly entertained in the mind of man; it is
called the transmigration of souls. It is enough for me to know that
mankind are made to improve themselves. All creation, visible and
invisible, is the workmanship of our God, the Supreme Architect and
Ruler of the whole, who organized the world, and created every living
thing upon it, to act in its sphere and order. To this end has He
ordained all things to increase and multiply. The Lord God Almighty has
decreed this principle to be the great governing law of existence, and
for that purpose are we formed. Furthermore, if man can understand and
receive it, mankind are organized to receive intelligence until they
become perfect in the sphere they are appointed to fill, which is far
ahead of us at present. When we use the term perfection, it applies
to man in his present condition, as well as to heavenly beings. We
are now, or may be, as perfect in our _sphere_ as God and angels are
in theirs, but the greatest intelligence in existence can continually
ascend to greater heights of perfection.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 92.

We read in the Bible, that there is one glory of the sun, another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars. In the Book of
Doctrine and Covenants these glories are called telestial, terrestrial,
and celestial, which is the highest. These are worlds, different
departments, or mansions, in our Father's house. New those men,
or those women, who know no more about the power of God, and the
influences of the Holy Spirit, than to be led entirely by another
person, suspending their own understanding, and pinning their faith
upon another's sleeve, will never be capable of entering into the
celestial glory, to be crowned as they anticipate; they will never be
capable of becoming Gods. They cannot rule themselves, to say nothing
of ruling others, but they must be dictated to in every trifle, like a
child. They cannot control themselves in the least, but James, Peter,
or somebody else must control them. They never can become Gods, nor
be crowned as rulers with glory, immortality, and eternal lives. They
never can hold sceptres of glory, majesty, and power in the celestial
kingdom. Who will? Those who are valiant and inspired with the true
independence of heaven, who will go forth boldly in the service of
their God, leaving others to do as they please, determined to do right,
though all mankind besides should take the opposite course. Will this
apply to any of you? Your own hearts can answer.--J. of D., Vol. I., p.
312.

Suppose the devil does tempt you, must you of necessity enter into
partnership again with him, open your doors, and bid him welcome to
your house, and tell him to reign there? Why do you not reflect, and
tell master devil, with all his associates and imps, to be gone,
feeling you have served him long enough.--J. of D., Vol. I., p, 323.

If true principles are revealed from heaven to men, and if there are
angels, and there is a possibility of their communicating to the human
family, always look for an opposite power, an evil power, to give
manifestations also; look out for the counterfeit.--J. of D., Vol.
VII,, p. 240.

When death is passed, the power of Satan has no more influence over a
faithful individual; that spirit is free, and can command the power of
Satan. The penalty demanded by the fall has been fully paid; all is
accomplished pertaining to it, when the tabernacle of a faithful person
is returned to earth. All that was lost is passed away, and that person
will again receive his body. When he is in the spirit world, he is free
from those contaminating and condemning influences of Satan that we
are now subject to. Here our bodies are subject to being killed by our
enemies our names to being cast out as evil. We are prosecuted, hated,
not beloved; though I presume that we are as much beloved here as the
spirits of the saints are in the spirit world by those spirits who hate
righteousness. It is the same warfare, but we will have power over
them. Those who have passed through the vail have power over the evil
spirits to command, and they must obey.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 240.

Oppression, persecution, afflictions, and other trials and privations
are necessary as a test to all professing to be Saints, that they may
have an opportunity to witness the workings of the power which is
opposed to truth and holiness.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 242.

Let the spirit that comes from the eternal world, which at the outset
is pure and holy, with the influence God gives to it, master all the
passions of the body, and bring it under subjection to the will of
Christ. That course makes us Saints.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 243.

Whether a truth be found with professed infidels, or with
Universalists, or the Church of Rome, or the Methodists, the Church of
England, the Presbyterians, the Baptists, the Quakers, the Shakers,
or any other of the various and numerous different sects and parties,
all of whom have more or less truth, it is the business of the Elders
of this Church (Jesus, their elder brother, being at their head,) to
gather up all the truths in the world pertaining to life and salvation,
to the gospel we preach, to mechanism of every kind, to the sciences,
and to philosophy, wherever it may be found in every nation, kindred,
tongue, and people, and bring it to Zion. The people upon this earth
have a great many errors, and they have also a great many truths.
This statement is not only true of the nations termed civilized those
who profess to worship the true God, but is equally applicable to
pagans of all countries, for in their religious rites and ceremonies
may be found a great many truths which we will also gather home to
Zion. All truth is for the salvation of the children of men--for their
benefit and learning for their furtherance in the principles of divine
knowledge.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 283.

The Latter-day Saints understand the Bible as it reads, but the
generality of modern Christians disagree with us, and say it needs
interpreting. They cannot believe our Lord means what He says in the
16th chapter of Mark, when He tells His Apostles to "go into all the
world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be
damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe," etc. "Now,"
say they, "we cannot believe that as it is written, but we have a
very pretty interpretation which suits us much better than the plain
text. And furthermore we have a sweeping argument that will destroy
all your system from beginning to end, and prove there is to be no
more revelation." Let us look at the passage here referred to. John,
while upon the Isle of Patmos, had a revelation which, he wrote, and
he concluded the same by saying, "For I testify unto every man that
heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written
in this book; and if any man shall take away from the words of the
book of this prophecy, God shall take away His part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written
in this book." When this book, the Bible, was compiled, it was selected
by the council of Carthage from a pile of books more than this pulpit
could hold, which has been printed, and bound in almost all shapes and
sizes, and called the Bible. John's revelation was one of the many
books destined by that council to form the Bible. And the saying which
we have quoted, and which constitutes the sweeping argument of modern
Christians against new revelation, only alludes to this particular
book, which was to be kept sacred, as the word of the Lord to John,
and not to the whole Bible; nor does it prohibit the Saints in his
day, or the Saints in any future time, from getting new revelation for
themselves. That is not all; if we turn to the writings of Moses, we
find the same sentiment, and almost the same language used. Moses says,
"Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord
your God which I command you." So if such quotations are given with
the intent to shut the heavens, and put an end to all new revelation,
then the revelations given to prophets who arose after Moses, and the
revelations given to Jesus Christ and His Apostles, including John
and his revelation on the Isle of Patmos, all amount to nothing, and
are not worthy of our notice. This "sweeping argument," when it is
examined, sweeps away rather too much; besides, John's gospel and his
epistle to his bretheren were written after he wrote his revelation on
the Isle of Patmos; consequently he would destroy his own system; but
it sets forth the ignorance and short-sightedness of those who have not
the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy.--J. of D. Vol.
I., p. 242.

Let us dedicate ourselves, our families, our substance, our time, our
talents, and everything we have upon the face of this world, with all
that will hereafter be entrusted to us, to the Lord our God; let the
whole be devoted to the building up of His kingdom upon the earth.--J.
of D. Vol. I., p. 200.

Teach your families how to control themselves; teach them good and
wholesome doctrine, and practice the same in your own lives. This
is the place for you to become polished shafts in the quiver of the
Almighty.--J. of D. Vol. I., p. 47.

When a man is capable of correcting you, and of giving you light, and
true doctrine, do not get up an altercation, but submit to be taught
like little children, and strive with all your might to understand.--J.
of D. Vol. I., p. 47.

We believe the New Testament, and consequently, to be consistent, we
must believe in new revelation, visions, angels, in all the gilts of
the Holy Ghost, and all the promises contained in these books, and
believe it about as it reads.--J. of D. Vol. I, p. 242.

The Millennium consists in this every heart in the Church and kingdom
of God being united in one; the kingdom increasing to the overcoming
of everything opposed to the economy of heaven, and Satan being bound,
and having a seal set upon him. All things else will be as they are
now, we shall eat, drink, and wear clothing. Let the people be holy,
and the earth under their feet will be holy. Let the people be holy
and filled with the Spirit of God, and every animal and creeping thing
will be filled with peace; the soil of the earth will bring forth in
its strength, and the fruits thereof will be meat for man. The more
purity that exists, the less is the strife; the more kind we are to
our animals, the more will peace in crease, and the savage nature of
the brute creation vanish away. If the people will not serve the devil
another moment whilst they live, if this congregation is possessed
of that spirit and resolution, here in this house is the Millennium.
Let the inhabitants of this city be possessed of that spirit, let the
people of the territory be possessed of that spirit, and here is the
Millennium. Let the whole people of the United States be possessed of
that spirit, and here is the Millennium, and so will it spread over all
the world.--J. of D. Vol. I., p. 203.

The power which belongs to the true riches is gained by pursuing a
righteous course, by maintaining an upright deportment towards all men,
and especially towards the household of faith, yielding to each other,
giving freely of that which the Lord has given to you, thus you can
secure to yourselves eternal riches; and gain influence and power over
all your friends, as well as your enemies.--J. of D., Vol. I, p. 273.

Were I to say to a son, The whole earth is in my hands to dispose of as
I will: I can make you the sovereign of the universe--the possessor of
the gold, the silver, the mountains, the valleys, the rivers, the lakes
the seas, and all that float upon them and that live upon the face of
the whole earth; for it is mine to give to you, my son, if you will
serve me one month faithfully; I require nothing of you that will give
you the least pain! all I require is strict obedience to my law. My son
faithfully serves me during twenty-nine days, and on the thirtieth day,
for the value of a straw, or for a mess of pottage he sells his right
and title to all I had promised him. This comparison falls very far
short of showing the loss a Saint sustains when he turns away from his
God and his religion.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 133.

As long as the spirit and body hold together, my tongue shall be swift
against evil, the Lord Almighty being my helper. Though it may be in
"Mormon" Elders, among the people in or out of the Church, if they
come in my path where I can chastize them, the Lord Almighty being my
helper, my tongue shall be swift against evil; and if evil come, let
it come. If for this my body shall fall, let it fall; when they have
destroyed the body, then they have no more that they can do; that is
the end of their power, and of the power of the devil on this earth;
but Jesus Christ has power to destroy both soul and body in hell.--J.
of D., Vol. I., p. 42.

Were I to make war upon an innocent people, because I had the power
to possess myself of their territory, their silver, gold, and other
property, and be the cause of slaying, say fifty thousand strong,
hale, hearty men, and devolving consequent suffering upon one hundred
thousand women and children, who would suffer through privation and
want, I am very much more guilty of murder than is the man who kills
only one person to obtain his pocket-book.--J. of D., Vol. VII, p. 137.

There is one virtue, attribute, or principle, which, if cherished
and practiced by the Saints, would prove salvation to thousands
upon thousands. I allude to charity, or love, from which proceed
forgiveness, long suffering, kindness, and patience.--J. of D., Vol.
VII., p. 133.

If a man drinks at the fountain of eternal life, he is as happy under
the broad canopy of heaven, without a home, as in a palace. This
I know by experience. I know that the things of this world, from
beginning to end, from the possession of mountains of gold down to a
crust of johnycake, makes little or no difference in the happiness of
an individual. The things of this world add to our natural comfort,
and are necessary to susiain mortal life. We need these comforts to
preserve our earthly existence; and many suppose, when they have
them in great abundance, that they have all that is needed to make
them happy. They are striving continually, and with all their might,
for that which does not add one particle to their happiness, though
it may not add to their comfort, and perhaps to the length of their
lives, if they do not kill themselves in their eagerness to grasp the
gilded butterfly. But those things have nothing to do with the spirit,
feeling, consolation, light, glory, peace, and joy that pertain to
heaven and heavenly things, which is the food of the everlasting spirit
within us.--J. of D., Vol. VII, p. 135.

Do not be so full of religion as to look upon every little overt act
that others may commit as being the unpardonable sin that will place
them beyond the reach cf redemption and the favors of our God.--J. of
D., Vol. VII, p. 136.

Our religion teaches us truth, virtue, holiness, faith in God and
in His Son Jesus Christ. It reveals mysteries; it brings to mind
things past and present--unfolding clearly things to come. It is the
foundation of mechanism; it is the spirit that gives Intelligence to
every living being upon the earth. All true philosophy originates from
that fountain from which we draw wisdom, knowledge, truth, and power.
What does it teach us? To love God and our fellow creatures, to be
compassionate, full of mercy, long-suffering and patient to the froward
and to those who are ignorant. There is glory in our religion that no
other religion that has ever been established upon the earth, in the
absence of the true Priesthood, ever possessed. It is the fountain of
all intelligence; it is to bring heaven to earth and exalt earth to
heaven, to prepare all intelligence that God has placed in the hearts
of the children of men to mingle with that intelligence which dwells
in eternity, and to elevate the mind above the trifling and frivolous
objects of time, which tend downward to destruction. It frees the mind
of man from darkness and ignorance, gives him that intelligence that
flows from heaven, and qualifies him to comprehend all things. This is
the character of the religion we believe in.--J. of D. Vol. VII., p.
140.

I say _shame_ on that man who will give way to his passions and use the
name of God or of Christ to curse his ox or his horse, or any creature
which God has made; it is a disgrace to him.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 241.

That a man is willing to die for his religion is no proof of its being
true; neither is it proof that a religion is false when one of its
votaries apostatizes from it.--J. of D., Vol. VII, p. 140.

I may heap up gold and silver like the mountains; I may gather
around me property, goods and chattels, but I could have no glory
in that compared with my religion; it is the fountain of light and
intelligence; it swallows up the truth contained in all the philosophy
of the world, both heathen and Christian; it circumscribes the wisdom
of man; it circumscribes all the wisdom and power of the world; it
reaches to that within the veil. Its bounds, its circumference, its
end, its height and depth are beyond the comprehension of mortals, _for
it has none_.--J., of D., Vol. I., p. 39.

If you have gold and silver, let it not come between you and your duty.
J. of D. Vol. I., p. 202.

When the breath leaves the body, your life has not become extinct;
your life is still in existence. And when you are in the spirit world,
everything there will appear as natural as things now do. Spirits
will be familiar with spirits in the spirit world--will converse,
behold, and exercise every variety of communication one with another as
familiarly and naturally as while here in tabernacles.--J. of D., Vol.
VII., p. 239.

If we are faithful to our religion, when we go into the spirit world,
the fallen spirits Lucifer and the third part of the heavenly hosts
that came with him, and the spirits of wicked men who have dwelt upon
this earth, the whole of them combined will have no influence over our
spirits.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 240.

The thrones and kingdoms of earth are frequently changing hands.
Adventurers rise up or go forth and establish new governments, and in
a few short years they are cast down to give place to more successful
powers. All earthly things are changing hands. The gold, the silver,
and other property pass from my hands to yours, and from yours to the
hands of others. Shame on a people that place their affections upon
this changing matter! Love God and the things that change not.--J. of
D., Vol. VII., p. 337.

The child who has his father's razor, or any other article dangerous
for him to handle, and about the use of which he has no knowledge,
when deprived of it, his trials are equal to ours, according to his
capacity. We seldom think of the trials of our little ones when we
say to them, you must not have this or that; you must do so and so to
receive my smiles and approbation; you must not think for a moment
that your judgment, wisdom, experience, and wishes are to be compared
with mine. Does not the Father of all living conduct Himself in this
wise towards His children? He has revealed to us that He will prepare
us for glory, for life eternal,--will preserve our identity forever,
if we will be guided by him. But we must be obedient to him, for He
understands more than we do. We should destroy ourselves if we were
suffered to take our own way; hence we are taught to suffer the Father
to point out our path to an eternal duration hereafter, where our
present afflictions will appear as flimsy as the shadows of the morning
that flee upon the approach of day.--J. of D., Vol. VII., p. 275.

If a man is worth millions of bushels of wheat and corn, he is not
wealthy enough to suffer his servant girl to sweep a single kernel of
it into the firs; let it be eaten by something, and pass again into the
earth, and thus fulfill the purpose for which it grew.--J. of D. Vol.
I., p. 253.

The man who lays up his gold and silver, who caches it away in a bank,
or in his iron safe, or buries it up in the earth, and comes here, and
professes to be a Saint, would tie up the hands of every individual in
this kingdom, and make them his servants if he could.--J. of D., Vol.
I., p. 253.

If I am not smart enough to take care of what the Lord lends me, I am
smart enough to hold my tongue about it, until I come across the thief
myself.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 255.

When I have gold and silver in my possession, which a thief may steal,
or friends borrow, and never pay me back again, or which may take the
wings of the morning, and I behold it no more, I only possess the
negative of the true riches.--J. of D., Vol. I, p. 266.

If this people will do as they are told, will live their religion, walk
humbly before their God, and deal justly with each other, we will make
you one promise, in the name of Israel's God, that you will never be
driven from the mountains.--J. of D., Vol. I., p. 319.

It is folly in the extreme for persons to say that they love God, when
they do not love their brethren.--J. of D., Vol. I, p. 297.

Speaking as the world view men and things, in the eyes of the vast
majority of mankind, the devil is the greatest gentleman that ever made
his appearance on this earth.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 347.

I hope as I grow old, to grow wise. As I advance in years, I hope to
advance in the true knowledge of God and godliness. I hope to increase
in the power of the Almighty, and in influence to establish peace and
righteousness upon the earth, and to bring all the sons and daughters
of Adam and Eve, even all who will hearken to the principles of
righteousness, to a true sense of the knowledge of God and godliness,
of themselves, and the relation they sustain to heaven and heavenly
beings.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 326.

It would be better if you and I never should have anything pertaining
to this world, than to lose the spirit of the gospel and love the
world.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p, 342.

The difficulty with the whole world in their divisions and
subdivisions, is that they have no more confidence in each other than
they have in their God, and that is none at all.--J. of D., Vol. IV.,
p. 296.

There never was that necessity; there never has been a time on the face
of the earth, from the time that the church went to destruction, and
the Priesthood was taked from the earth, that the powers of darkness
and the powers of earth and hell were so embittered, and enraged, and
incensed against God and godliness on the earth, as they are at the
present. And when the spirit of persecution, the spirit of hatred, of
wrath, and malice ceases in the world against this people, it will be
the time that this people have apostatized and joined hands with the
wicked, and never until then.--J. of D., Vol. IV., p. 327.





End of Project Gutenberg's Mr. Durant of Salt Lake City, by Ben E. Rich

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. DURANT OF SALT LAKE CITY ***

***** This file should be named 56685.txt or 56685.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/6/8/56685/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Renah
Holmes.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

ean-p,ytamei
angrhltwerg EBook of The Hudson, by Wallace Bruce

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hudson
       Three Centuries of History, Romance and Invention

Author: Wallace Bruce

Release Date: February 22, 2006 [EBook #17823]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUDSON ***




Produced by Curtis Weyant, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)





[Transcriber's Note: Each page of this book contained, as a footer, a
stanza of poetry, or a prose quotation, which, although pertinent to
the text, were not part of it.

I have retained these, moving them to a suitable location between
paragraphs, and enclosing them in short markers: * * * ....* * *. Any
poetry not enclosed within short * * * markers is an integral part of
the text.

The list of typos and corrections is at the end of the book.]

       *       *       *       *       *






  THE HUDSON

  Three Centuries of
  History, Romance and Invention



  BY WALLACE BRUCE




  Centennial Edition




  Published by
  BRYANT UNION COMPANY
  NEW YORK



COPYRIGHT 1907 BY WALLACE BRUCE




CONTENTS.


CENTENNIAL GREETING.
                                                             PAGE

HISTORY, ROMANCE AND INVENTION                      9-39
  An Open Book                                                 10
  The Hudson and the Rhine                                     11
  The Half Moon                                                12
  Its Discovery                                                15
  First Description                                            16
  Names of the Hudson                                          18
  Hills and Mountains                                          19
  Sources of the Hudson                                        19
  First Settlement                                             20
  The West India Company                                       21
  Original Manors and Patents                                  23
  The Dutch and the English                                    24
  New Amsterdam                                                25
  New York                                                     26
  Sons of Liberty                                              28
  Greater New York                                             30
  Hudson River Steamboats                                      31
  Day Line Steamers                                            34
  The Old Reaches                                              38
  Five Divisions of the Hudson                                 39


NEW YORK TO ALBANY.

DESBROSSES STREET PIER TO FORTY-SECOND STREET      41-43
  Historic River Front                                         41
  A Great Panorama                                             41
  Statue of Liberty--Stevens Castle                            42

FORTY-SECOND TO ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH       43-48
  Weehawken, Hamilton and Burr                                 43
  Riverside Drive and Park                                     45
  Columbia University                                          46
  General Grant's Tomb                                         46

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH ST. TO YONKERS        49-50
  Washington Heights                                           49
  The Palisades                                                52
  Island of Manhattan                                          56
  Spuyten Duyvel Creek                                         57
  Yonkers                                                      58

YONKERS TO WEST POINT                              59-96
  Hastings and Dobbs Ferry                                     60
  Tappan Zee and Piermont                                      61
  Irvington and "Sunnyside"                                    62
  Washington Irving                                            63
  The Headless Horseman                                        66
  Tarrytown and Tappan                                         67
  Sleepy Hollow                                                70
  Nyack                                                        72
  Ossining                                                     73
  Croton River and Reservoir                                   74
  Haverstraw                                                   75
  Stony Point                                                  77
  Peekskill                                                    79
  Story of Captain Kidd                                        80
  The Highlands                                                81
  Dunderberg                                                   82
  Anthony's Nose                                               83
  Fort Clinton and Fort Montgomery                             84
  Beverley House                                               87
  Arnold's Flight                                              88
  Buttermilk Falls                                             91
  West Point Military Academy                                  92
  Plateau Buildings and Memorials                           93-94
  Fort Putnam                                                  95

WEST POINT TO NEWBURGH                            97-103
  Northern Gate of Highlands                                   98
  "Undercliff"                                                 99
  Storm King                                                  100
  Cornwall and "Idlewild"                                     102

NEWBURGH TO POUGHKEEPSIE                         104-128
  Washington's Headquarters                                   104
  Refusing the Crown                                          105
  Suffering of Soldiers                                       106
  Cessation of Hostilities                                    107
  Marquis de Lafayette                                        109
  Centennial Celebration                                      110
  Fishkill                                                    113
  Duyvel's Dans Kammer                                        118
  "Locust Grove"                                              119
  The Storm Ship                                              120
  Poughkeepsie                                                121

POUGHKEEPSIE TO KINGSTON                         129-146
  Hyde Park                                                   130
  Mount Hymettus                                              130
  Rhinecliff                                                  135
  City of Kingston                                            136
  The Senate House                                            138
  The Southern Catskills                                      142

KINGSTON TO CATSKILL                             147-168
  Montgomery Place                                            147
  Story of Steam Navigation                                   149
  Robert Fulton                                               151
  The "Clermont"                                              152
  Tivoli                                                      154
  Saugerties                                                  156
  The Livingston Country                                      157
  The "Shad Industry"                                         158
  Germantown                                                  160
  Man in the Mountain                                         161
  New York City Water Supply                                  162
  The Clover Reach                                            163
  Catskill                                                    164
  Otis Elevating Railway                                      165

CATSKILL TO HUDSON                               169-172
  Hudson                                                      169
  Columbia Springs                                            170
  Claverack and Hillsdale                                     171

HUDSON TO ALBANY                                 173-185
  Athens                                                      173
  The Ice Industry                                            173
  Anthony Van Corlear                                         176
  The Mahican Tribe                                           177
  The Mahicans, Delawares and Iroquois                        178
  The Old Van Rensselaer House                                180
  Albany                                                      181


THE UPPER HUDSON.

ALBANY TO SARATOGA                               186-191
    Saratoga                                                  187
    Historic Saratoga                                         189
    Mount McGregor                                            190

SARATOGA TO THE ADIRONDACKS                      191-201
    Saratoga to Lake George                                   192

LAKE GEORGE TO THE ADIRONDACKS                   197-201
    Ticonderoga                                               198
    Bluff Point                                               199
    Plattsburgh and the Saranacs                              201

SOURCE OF THE HUDSON                             202-210
    The Tahawas Club                                          202
    The Upper Ausable                                         203
    Haystack and Camp Colden                                  204
    The Deserted Village                                      205
    Indian Pass                                               206
    Tahawas                                                   210

GEOLOGY, TIDES AND CONDENSED POINTS              211-224
    Geological Formation                                  211-215
    The Hudson Tide                                           215
    Condensed Points--New York to Albany                  216-224


[Illustration: ROBERT FULTON'S "CLERMONT" 1807]




1907--1909

_CENTENNIAL GREETING_


_Hendrick Hudson and Robert Fulton are closely associated in the
history of our river, and more particularly at this time, as the dates
of their achievements unite the centennial of the first successful
steamer in 1807, with the tri-centennial of the discovery of the river
in 1609. In fact, these three centuries of navigation, with rapidly
increasing development in later years, might be graphically
condensed--_

"_Half Moon_," _1609_; "_Clermont_," _1807_;

"_Hendrick Hudson_," _1906_.

_Singularly enough the discovery of Hendrick Hudson, and the invention
of Robert Fulton are also similar in having many adverse claimants who
forget the difference between attempt and accomplishment._

_Everyone knows that Verrazano entered the Narrows and harbor of
our river in 1524, and sailed far enough to see the outline of the
Palisades; that Gomez visited its mouth in 1525; Cabot still earlier
in 1498; and various Norsemen, named and nameless, for several
centuries before them, coasted along the shore and indenture of the
"River of the Manhattoes," but failed to acquire or transmit any
knowledge of the river's real course or character, and it was left for
Hendrick Hudson to be its first voyager and thereby to have and to
hold against all comers the glory of discovery._

       * * *

  A century vast of Hudson-fame
    Which Irving's fancy seals;
  Whose ripples murmur Morse's name
    And flash to Fulton's wheels.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

_So Robert Fulton had several predecessors in the idea of applying
steam to navigation--John Fitch in 1785, William Symington in 1788 and
many others who likewise_ coasted along the shore and indenture of a
great idea, _marked by continual failure and final abandonment. It was
reserved for Fulton to complete and stamp upon his labor the seal of
service and success, and to stand, therefore, its accepted inventor._

_In addition to the invention of Fulton who has contributed so much
to the business and brotherhood of mankind, the telegraph of Morse
occupies a prominent page of our Hudson history, and it is said that
Morse left unfinished a novel, the incidents of which were associated
with the Highlands, in order to work out his idea which gave the
Hudson a grander chapter._

_Fulton's and Morse's inventions are also happily associated in this,
that the steamboat was necessary before the Atlantic cable, born of
Morse's invention, could be laid, and, singularly enough, the laying
of the cable, largely promoted by Hudson River genius and capital,
by Field, Cooper, Morse and others on August 5, 1857, marks the very
middle of the centennial which we are now observing._

       * * *

  A cycle grand with wonders fraught
    That triumph over time and space;
  In woven steel its dreams are wrought,
    The nations whisper face to face.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

[Illustration: _Hendrick Hudson's "Half Moon_."]




THE HUDSON


Among all the rivers of the world the Hudson is acknowledged queen,
decked with romance, jewelled with poetry, clad with history, and
crowned with beauty. More than this, the Hudson is a noble threshold
to a great continent and New York Bay a fitting portal. The traveler
who enters the Narrows for the first time is impressed with wonder,
and the charm abides even with those who pass daily to and fro amid
her beauties. No other river approaches the Hudson in varied grandeur
and sublimity, and no other city has so grand and commodious a harbor
as New York. It has been the privilege of the writer of this handbook
to see again and again most of the streams of the old world "renowned
in song and story," to behold sunrise on the Bay of Naples and sunset
at the Golden Gate of San Francisco, but the spell of the Hudson
remains unbroken, and the bright bay at her mouth reflects the
noontide without a rival. To pass a day in her company, rich with
the story and glory of three hundred years, is worth a trip across a
continent, and it is no wonder that the European traveler says again
and again: "to see the Hudson alone, is worth a voyage across the
Atlantic."

       * * *

    A very good land to fall in with and a pleasant land to see!

    _Hendrick Hudson_

       * * *

How like a great volume of history romance and poetry seem her bright
illumined pages with the broad river lying as a crystal book-mark
between her open leaves! And how real this idea becomes to the Day
Line tourist, with the record of Washington and Hamilton for its
opening sentence, as he leaves the Up-Town landing, and catches
messages from Fort Washington and Fort Lee. What Indian legends
cluster about the brow of Indian Head blending with the love story of
Mary Phillipse at the Manor House of Yonkers. How Irving's vision of
Katrina and Sleepy Hollow become woven with the courage of Paulding
and the capture of Andre at Tarrytown. How the Southern Portal of the
Highlands stands sentineled by Stony Point, a humble crag converted by
the courage of Anthony Wayne into a mountain peak of Liberty.

How North and South Beacon again summon the Hudson yeomen from harvest
fields to the defense of country, while Fort Putnam, still eloquent in
her ruins, looks down upon the best drilled boys in the world at West
Point. Further on Newburgh, Poughkeepsie and Kingston shake fraternal
hands in the abiding trinity of Washington, Hamilton and Clinton,
while northward rise the Ontioras where Rip Van Winkle slept, and woke
to wonder at the happenings of twenty years.

What stories of silent valleys told by murmuring streams from the
Berkshire Hills and far away fields where Stark and Ethan Allen
triumphed. What tales of Cooper, where the Mohawk entwines her fingers
with those of the Susquehanna, and poems of Longfellow, Bryant and
Holmes, of Dwight, of Halleck and of Drake; ay, and of Yankee
Doodle too, written at the Old Van Rensselaer House almost within a
pebble-throw of the steamer as it approaches Albany. What a wonderful
book of history and beauty, all to be read in one day's journey!

       * * *

    Roll on! Roll on!
  Thou river of the North! Tell thou to all
  The isles, tell thou to all the Continents
  The grandeur of my land.

  _William Wallace._

       * * *

The Hudson has often been styled "The Rhine of America." There is,
however, little of similarity and much of contrast. The Rhine from
Dusseldorf to Manheim is only twelve hundred to fifteen hundred feet
in breadth. The Hudson from New York to Albany averages more than five
thousand feet from bank to bank. At Tappan Zee the Hudson is ten times
as wide as the Rhine at any point above Cologne. At Bonn the Rhine is
barely one-third of a mile, whereas the Hudson at Haverstraw Bay is
over four miles in width. The average breadth of the Hudson from New
York to Poughkeepsie is almost eight thousand feet.

The mountains of the Rhine also lack the imposing character of
the Highlands. The far-famed Drachenfels, the Landskron, and the
Stenzleburg are only seven hundred and fifty feet above the river;
the Alteberg eight hundred, the Rosenau nine hundred, and the great
Oelberg thirteen hundred and sixty-two. According to the latest United
States Geological Survey the entire group of mountains at the northern
gate of the Highlands is from fourteen hundred to sixteen hundred and
twenty-five feet in height, not to speak of the Catskills from three
thousand to almost four thousand feet in altitude.

It is not the fault of the Rhine with its nine hundred miles of
rapid flow that it looks tame compared with the Hudson. Even the
Mississippi, draining a valley three thousand miles in extent, looks
insignificant at St. Louis or New Orleans contrasted with the Hudson
at Tarrytown. The Hudson is in fact a vast estuary of the sea; the
tide rises two feet at Albany and six inches at Troy. A professor of
the Berlin University says: "You lack our castles but the Hudson is
infinitely grander." Thackeray, in "The Virginians," gives the Hudson
the verdict of beauty; and George William Curtis, comparing the Hudson
with the rivers of the Old World, has gracefully said: "The Danube
has in part glimpses of such grandeur, the Elbe has sometimes such
delicately penciled effects, but no European river is so lordly in its
bearing, none flows in such state to the sea."

       * * *

    I have been up and down the Hudson by water. The entire river is
    pretty, but the glory of the Hudson is at West Point.

    _Anthony Trollope._

       * * *

Baedeker, a high and just authority, in his recent Guide to the United
States says: "The Hudson has sometimes been called the American Rhine,
but that title perhaps does injustice to both rivers. The Hudson,
through a great part of its extent, is three or four times as wide
as the Rhine, and its scenery is grander and more inspiring; while,
though it lacks the ruined castles and ancient towns of the German
river, it is by no means devoid of historical associations of a more
recent character. The vine-clad slopes of the Rhine have, too, no
ineffective substitute in the brilliant autumn coloring of the
timbered hillsides of the Hudson."

       * * *

  A stately stream around which as around
  The German Rhine hover mystic shapes

  _Richard Burton_

       * * *

What must have been the sensation of those early voyagers, coasting a
new continent, as they halted at the noble gateway of the river and
gazed northward along the green fringed Palisades; or of Hendrick
Hudson, who first traversed its waters from Manhattan to the Mohawk,
as he looked up from the chubby bow of his "Half Moon" at the massive
columnar formation of the Palisades or at the great mountains of the
Highlands; what dreams of success, apparently within reach, were his,
when night came down in those deep forest solitudes under the shadowy
base of Old Cro' Nest and Klinkerberg Mountain, where his little craft
seemed a lone cradle of civilization; and then, when at last, with
immediate purpose foiled, he turned his boat southward, having
discovered, but without knowing it, something infinitely more valuable
to future history than his long-sought "Northwestern Passage to
China," how he must have gazed with blended wonder and awe at the
distant Catskills as their sharp lines came out, as we have seen
them many a September morning, bold and clear along the horizon, and
learned in gentle reveries the poetic meaning of the blue _Ontioras_
or "Mountains of the Sky." How fondly he must have gazed on the
picturesque hills above Apokeepsing and listened to the murmuring
music of Winnikee Creek, when the air was clear as crystal and the
banks seemed to be brought nearer, perfectly reflected in the glassy
surface, while here and there his eye wandered over grassy uplands,
and rested on hills of maize in shock, looking for all the world like
mimic encampments of Indian wigwams! Then as October came with tints
which no European eye had ever seen, and sprinkled the hill-tops
with gold and russet, he must indeed have felt that he was living an
enchanted life, or journeying in a fairy land!

How graphically the poet Willis has put the picture in musical prose:
"Fancy the bold Englishman, as the Dutch called Hendrick Hudson,
steering his little yacht the 'Haalve Maan,' for the first time
through the Highlands. Imagine his anxiety for the channel forgotten,
as he gazed up at the towering rocks, and round the green shores, and
onward past point and opening bend, miles away into the heart of the
country; yet with no lessening of the glorious stream before him and
no decrease of promise in the bold and luxuriant shores. Picture him
lying at anchor below Newburgh with the dark pass of the Wey-Gat
frowning behind him, the lofty and blue Catskills beyond, and the
hillsides around covered with lords of the soil exhibiting only less
wonder than friendliness."

If Willis forgot the season of the year and left out the landscape
glow which the voyager saw, Talmage completed the picture in a rainbow
paragraph of color: "Along our river and up and down the sides of the
great hills there was an indescribable mingling of gold, and orange
and crimson and saffron, now sobering into drab and maroon, now
flaring up into solferino and scarlet. Here and there the trees looked
as if their tips had blossomed into fire. In the morning light the
forests seemed as if they had been transfigured and in the evening
hours they looked as if the sunset had burst and dropped upon the
leaves. It seemed as if the sea of divine glory had dashed its surf to
the top of the crags and it had come dripping down to the lowest leaf
and deepest cavern."

       * * *

  So fair yon haven clasped its isles, in such a sunset gleam,
  When Hendrick and his sea-worn tars first sounded up the stream.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

On such a day in 1883 it was the privilege of the writer to stand
before 150,000 people at Newburgh on the occasion of the Centennial
Celebration of the Disbanding of the Army under Washington, and, in
his poem entitled "The Long Drama," to portray the great mountain
background bounding the southern horizon with autumnal splendor:

  October lifts with colors bright
    Her mountain canvas to the sky,
  The crimson trees aglow with light
    Unto our banners wave reply.

  Like Horeb's bush the leaves repeat
    From lips of flame with glory crowned:--
  "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet,
    The place they trod is holy ground."

Such was the vision Hendrick Hudson must have had in those far-off
September and October days, and such the picture which visitors still
compass long distances to behold.

"It is a far cry to Loch Awe" says an old Scottish proverb, and it
is a long step from the sleepy rail of the "Half Moon" to the
roomy-decked floating palaces--the "Hendrick Hudson," the "New York"
and the "Albany." Before beginning our journey let us, therefore,
bridge the distance with a few intermediate facts, from 1609, relating
to the discovery of the river, its early settlement, its old reaches
and other points essential to the fullest enjoyment of our trip, which
in sailor-parlance might be styled "a gang-plank of history," reaching
as it does from the old-time yacht to the modern steamer, and spanning
three hundred years.

       * * *

    The prow of the "Half-Moon" has left a broadening wake whose
    ripples have written an indelible history, not only along the
    Hudson's shores, but have left their imprint on kingdoms over the
    sea.

    _William Wait._

       * * *

=Its Discovery.=--In the year 1524, thirty-two years after the
discovery of America, the navigator Verrazano, a French officer,
anchored off the island of Manhattan and proceeded a short distance up
the river. The following year, Gomez, a Portuguese in the employ of
Spain, coasted along the continent and entered the Narrows. Several
sea-rovers also visited our noble bay about 1598, but it was reserved
for Hendrick Hudson, with a mixed crew of eighteen or twenty men in
the "Half Moon," to explore the river from Sandy Hook to Albany, and
carry back to Europe a description of its beauty. He had previously
made two fruitless voyages for the Muscovy Company--an English
corporation--in quest of a passage to China, _via_ the North Pole and
Nova Zembla.

In the autumn of 1608 he was called to Amsterdam, and sailed from
Texel, April 5, 1609, in the service of the Dutch East India Company.
Reaching Greenland he coasted southward, arriving at Cape Cod August
6th, Chesapeake Bay August 28th, and then sailed north to Sandy Hook.
He entered the Bay of New York September the 3d, passed through the
Narrows, and anchored in what is now called Newark Bay; on the 12th
resumed his voyage, and, drifting with the tide, remained over night
on the 13th about three miles above the northern end of Manhattan
Island; on the 14th sailed through what is now known as Tappan Zee and
Haverstraw Bay, entered the Highlands and anchored for the night near
the present dock of West Point. On the morning of the 15th beheld
Newburgh Bay, reached Catskill on the 16th, Athens on the 17th,
Castleton and Albany on the 18th, and sent out an exploring boat as
far as Waterford. He became thoroughly satisfied that this route did
not lead to China--a conclusion in harmony with that of Champlain,
who, the same summer, had been making his way south, through Lake
Champlain and Lake George, in quest of the South Sea.

       * * *

    O mighty river of the North! Thy lips meet ocean here, and in deep
    joy he lifts his great white brow, and gives his stormy voice a
    milder tone.

    _William Wallace_

       * * *

There is something humorous in the idea of these old mariners
attempting to sail through a continent 3,000 miles wide, seamed with
mountain chains from 2,000 to 15,000 feet in height. Hudson's return
voyage began September 23d. He anchored again in Newburgh Bay the
25th, arrived at Stony Point October 1st, reached Sandy Hook the 4th,
and returned to Europe.

=First Description of the Hudson.=--The official record of the voyage
was kept by Robert Juet, mate of the "Half Moon," and his journal
abounds with graphic and pleasing incidents as to the people and their
customs. At the Narrows the Indians visited the vessel, "clothed in
mantles of feathers and robes of fur, the women clothed in hemp; red
copper tobacco pipes, and other things of copper, they did wear about
their necks." At Yonkers they came on board in great numbers. Two were
detained and dressed in red coats, but they sprang overboard and swam
away. At Catskill they found "a very loving people, and very old men.
They brought to the ship Indian corn, pumpkins and tobaccos." Near
Schodack the "Master's mate went on land with an old savage, governor
of the country, who carried him to his house and made him good
cheere." "I sailed to the shore," he writes, "in one of their canoes,
with an old man, who was chief of a tribe, consisting of forty men and
seventeen women. These I saw there in a house well constructed of oak
bark, and circular in shape, so that it has the appearance of being
built with an arched roof. It contained a large quantity of corn and
beans of last year's growth, and there lay near the house, for the
purpose of drying, enough to load three ships, besides what was
growing in the fields. On our coming to the house two mats were spread
out to sit upon, and some food was immediately served in well-made
wooden bowls."

"Two men were also dispatched at once, with bows and arrows in quest
of game, who soon brought in a pair of pigeons, which they had shot.
They likewise killed a fat dog, (probably a black bear), and skinned
it in great haste, with shells which they had got out of the water."

       * * *

    Down whose waterways the wings of poetry and romance like magic
    sails bear the awakened souls of men.

    _Richard Burton._

       * * *

The well-known hospitality of the Hudson River valley has, therefore,
"high antiquity" in this record of the garrulous writer. At Albany the
Indians flocked to the vessel, and Hudson determined to try the chiefs
to see "whether they had any treachery in them." "So they took them
down into the cabin, and gave them so much wine and _aqua vitae_ that
they were all merry. In the end one of them was drunk, and they could
not tell how to take it." The old chief, who took the _aqua vitae_,
was so grateful when he awoke the next day, that he showed them all
the country, and gave them venison.

Passing down through the Highlands the "Half Moon" was becalmed near
Stony Point and the "people of the Mountains" came on board and
marvelled at the ship and its equipment. One canoe kept hanging under
the stern and an Indian pilfered a pillow and two shirts from the
cabin windows. The mate shot him in the breast and killed him. A boat
was lowered to recover the articles "when one of them in the water
seized hold of it to overthrow it, but the cook seized a sword and cut
off one of his hands and he was drowned." At the head of Manhattan
Island the vessel was again attacked. Arrows were shot and two more
Indians were killed, then the attack was renewed and two more were
slain.

It might also be stated that soon after the arrival of Hendrick Hudson
at the mouth of the river one of the English soldiers, John Coleman,
was killed by an arrow shot in the throat. "He was buried," according
to Ruttenber, "upon the adjacent beach, the first European victim of
an Indian weapon on the Mahicanituk. Coleman's point is the monument
to this occurrence."

The "Half Moon" never returned and it will be remembered that Hudson
never again saw the river that he discovered. He was to leave his name
however as a monument to further adventure and hardihood in Hudson's
Bay, where he was cruelly set adrift by a mutinous crew in a little
boat to perish in the midsummer of 1611.

       * * *

  The sea just peering the headlands through
  Where the sky is lost in deeper blue.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

=Names of the Hudson.=--The Iroquois called the river the "Cohatatea."
The Mahicans and Lenapes the "Mahicanituk," or "the ever-flowing
waters." Verrazano in 1524 styled it Rio de Montaigne. Gomez in 1525
Rio San Antonio. Hudson styled it the "Manhattes" from the tribe at
its mouth. The Dutch named it the "Mauritius," in 1611, in honor of
Prince Maurice of Nassau, and afterwards "the Great River." It has
also been referred to as the "Shatemuck" in verse. It was called
"Hudson's River" not by the Dutch, as generally stated, but by the
English, as Hudson was an Englishman, although he sailed from a Dutch
port, with a Dutch crew, and a Dutch vessel. It was also called the
"North River," to distinguish it from the Delaware, the South River.
It is still frequently so styled, and the East River almost "boxes the
compass" as applied to Long Island Sound.

=Height of Hills and Mountains.=--It is interesting to hear the
opinions of different people journeying up and down the Hudson as to
the height of mountains along the river. The Palisades are almost
always under-estimated, probably on account of their distance from
the steamer. It is only when we consider the size of a house at their
base, or the mast of a sloop anchored near the shore, that we can
fairly judge of their magnitude. Various guides, put together in a day
or a month, by writers who have made a single journey, or by persons
who have never consulted an authority, have gone on multiplying
blunder upon blunder, but the United States Geological Survey
furnishes reliable information. According to their maps the Palisades
are from 300 to 500 feet in height, the Highlands from 785 to 1625,
and the Catskills from 3000 to 3885 feet.

       * * *

  Beneath the cliffs the river steals
    In darksome eddies to the shore,
  But midway every sail reveals
    Reflected on its crystal floor.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *


        THE PALISADES.

    At Fort Lee                     300 feet.
    Opposite Mt. St. Vincent        400  "
    Opposite Hastings               500  "


        THE HIGHLANDS.

    Sugar Loaf                      785 feet.
    Dunderberg                      865  "
    Anthony's Nose                  900  "
    Storm King                     1368  "
    Old Cro' Nest                  1405  "
    Bull Hill                      1425  "
    South Beacon                   1625  "


        THE CATSKILLS.

    North Mountain                 3000 feet.
    Plaaterkill                    3135  "
    Outlook                        3150  "
    Stoppel Point                  3426  "
    Round Top                      3470  "
    High Peak                      3660  "
    Sugar Loaf                     3782  "
    Plateau                        3855  "

=Sources of the Hudson.=--The Hudson rises in the Adirondacks, and
is formed by two short branches. The northern branch (17 miles in
length), has its source in Indian Pass, at the base of Mount McIntyre;
the eastern branch, in a little lake poetically called the "Tear of
the Clouds," 4,321 feet above the sea under the summit of Tahawus,
the noblest mountain of the Adirondacks, 5,344 feet in height. About
thirty miles below the junction it takes the waters of Boreas River,
and in the southern part of Warren County, nine miles east of Lake
George, the tribute of the Schroon. About fifteen miles north of
Saratoga it receives the waters of the Sacandaga, then the streams of
the Battenkill and the Walloomsac; and a short distance above Troy its
largest tributary, the Mohawk. The tide rises six inches at Troy and
two feet at Albany, and from Troy to New York, a distance of one
hundred and fifty miles, the river is navigable by large steamboats.

       * * *

  Of grottoes in the far dim woods,
    Of pools moss-rimmed and deep,
  From whose embrace the little rills
    In daring venture creep.

  _E.A. Lente._

       * * *

The principal streams which flow into the Hudson between Albany and
New York are the Norman's Kill, on west bank, two miles south of
Albany; the Mourdener's Kill, at Castleton, eight miles below Albany,
on the east bank; Coxsackie Creek, on west bank, seventeen miles below
Albany; Kinderhook Creek, six miles north of Hudson; Catskill Creek,
six miles south of Hudson; Roeliffe Jansen's Creek, on east bank,
seven miles south of Hudson; the Esopus Creek, which empties at
Saugerties; the Rondout Creek, at Rondout; the Wappingers, at New
Hamburgh; the Fishkill, at Matteawan, opposite Newburgh; the Peekskill
Creek, and Croton River. The course of the river is nearly north and
south, and drains a comparatively narrow valley.

It is emphatically the "River of the Mountains," as it rises in the
Adirondacks, flows seaward east of the Helderbergs, the Catskills, the
Shawangunks, through twenty miles of the Highlands and along the base
of the Palisades. More than any other river it preserves the character
of its origin, and the following apostrophe from the writer's poem,
"The Hudson," condenses its continuous "mountain-and-lake-like"
quality:

  O Hudson, mountain-born and free,
    Thy youth a deep impression takes,
  For, mountain-guarded to the sea,
    Thy course is but a chain of lakes.

=The First Settlement of the Hudson.=--In 1610 a Dutch ship visited
Manhattan to trade with the Indians and was soon followed by others
on like enterprise. In 1613 Adrian Block came with a few comrades and
remained the winter. In 1614 the merchants of North Holland organized
a company and obtained from the States General a charter to trade in
the New Netherlands, and soon after a colony built a few houses and
a fort near the Battery. The entire island was purchased from the
Indians in 1624 for the sum of sixty guilders or about twenty-four
dollars. A fort was built at Albany in 1623 and known as Fort Aurania
or Fort Orange. From Wassenaer's "Historie van Europa," 1621-1632, as
translated in the 3d volume of the Documentary History of New York, a
castle--Fort Nassau--was built in 1624, on an island on the north side
of the River Montagne, now called Mauritius. "But as the natives there
were somewhat discontented, and not easily managed, the projectors
abandoned it, intending now to plant a colony among the Maikans
(Mahicans), a nation lying twenty-five miles (American measure
seventy-five miles) on both sides of the river, upwards." In another
document we learn that "The West India Company being chartered, a
vessel of 130 lasts, called the 'New Netherland' (whereof Cornelius
Jacobs, of Hoorn, was skipper), with thirty families, mostly Walloons,
was equipped in the spring of 1623."

       * * *

  Where Manhattan reigned of old
  Long before the age of gold
  In the fair encircled isle
  Formed for beauty's warmest smile.

  _William Crow_

       * * *

In the beginning of May they entered the Hudson, found a "Frenchman"
lying in the mouth of the river, who would erect the arms of the King
of France there, but the Hollanders would not permit him, opposing it
by commission from the Lord's States General and the Directors of the
West India Company, and "in order not to be frustrated therein, they
convoyed the Frenchman out of the rivers." This having been done, they
sailed up the Maikans, 140 miles, near which they built and completed
a fort, named "Orange," with four bastions, on an island, by them
called "Castle Island." This was probably the island below Castleton,
now known as Baern Island, where the first white child was born on the
Hudson.

In another volume we read that "a colony was planted in 1625 on
the Manhetes Island, where a fort was staked out by Master Kryn
Fredericke, an engineer. The counting-house is kept in a stone
building thatched with reed; the other houses are of the bark of
trees. There are thirty ordinary houses on the east side of the river,
which runs nearly north and south." This is the description of New
York City when Charles the First was King.

       * * *

    Behold the natural advantages of our State; the situation
    of our principal seaport; the facility that the
    Sound affords for an intercourse with the East, and the
    noble Hudson which bears upon its bosom the wealth
    of the remotest part of the State.

    _Robert R. Livingston._

       * * *


[Illustration: OLOFFE VAN KORTLANDT'S DREAM.]

Moreover, we should not forget that Communipaw outranks New York in
antiquity, and, according to Knickerbocker, whose quiet humor is
always read and re-read with pleasure, might justly be considered the
Mother Colony. For lo! the sage Oloffe Van Kortlandt dreamed a dream,
and the good St. Nicholas came riding over the tops of the trees,
and descended upon the island of Manhattan and sat himself down
and smoked, "and the smoke ascended in the sky, and formed a cloud
overhead; and Oloffe bethought him, and he hastened and climbed up to
the top of one of the tallest trees, and saw that the smoke spread
over a great extent of country; and, as he considered it more
attentively, he fancied that the great volume assumed a variety of
marvelous forms, where, in dim obscurity, he saw shadowed out palaces
and domes and lofty spires, all of which lasted but a moment, and then
passed away." So New York, like Alba Longa and Rome, and other cities
of antiquity, was under the immediate care of its tutelar saint. Its
destiny was foreshadowed, for now the palaces and domes and lofty
spires are real and genuine, and something more than dreams are made
of.

       * * *

  Below the cliffs Manhattan's spires
    Glint back the sunset's latest beam;
  The bay is flecked with twinkling fires;
    Or is it but "Van Kortlandt's dream?"

  _Wallace Bruce_

       * * *

=The Original Manors and Patents.=--According to a map of the Province
of New York, published in 1779, the Phillipsburg Patent embraced a
large part of Westchester County. North of this was the Manor of
Cortland, reaching from Tarrytown to Anthony's Nose. Above this
was the Phillipse Patent, reaching to the mouth of Fishkill Creek,
embracing Putnam County. Between Fishkill Creek and the Wappingers
Creek was the Rombout Patent. The Schuyler Patent embraced a few
square miles in the vicinity of Poughkeepsie. Above this was the
purchase of Falconer & Company, and east of this tract what was known
as the Great Nine Partners. Above the Falconer Purchase was the Henry
Beekman Patent, reaching to Esopus Island, and east of this the Little
Nine Partners. Above the Beekman Patent was the Schuyler Patent. Then
the Manor of Livingston, reaching from Rhinebeck to Catskill Station,
opposite Catskill. Above this Rensselaerwick, reaching north to a
point opposite Coeymans. The Manor of Rensselaer extended on both
sides of the river to a line running nearly east and west, just above
Troy. North and west of this Manor was the County of Albany, since
divided into Rensselaer, Saratoga, Washington, Schoharie, Greene and
Albany. The Rensselaer Manor was the only one that reached across the
river. The west bank of the Hudson, below the Rensselaer Manor, is
simply indicated on this map of 1779 as Ulster and Orange Counties.

=New Amsterdam.=--For about fifty years after the Dutch Settlement the
island of Manhattan was known as New Amsterdam. Washington Irving, in
his Knickerbocker History, has surrounded it with a loving halo and
thereby given to the early records of New York the most picturesque
background of any State in the Union.

       * * *

  The city bright below, and far away
  Sparkling in golden light his own romantic Bay.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

Among other playful allusions to the Indian names he takes the word
Manna-hatta of Robert Juet to mean "the island of manna," or in other
words a land flowing with milk and honey. He refers humorously to the
Yankees as "an ingenious people who out-bargain them in the market,
out-speculate them on the exchange, out-top them in fortune, and run
up mushroom palaces so high that the tallest Dutch family mansion has
not wind enough left for its weather-cock."

What would the old burgomaster think now of the mounting palaces of
trade, stately apartments, and the piled up stories of commercial
buildings? In fact the highest structure Washington Irving ever saw in
New York was a nine-story sugar refinery. With elevators running two
hundred feet a minute, there seems no limit to these modern mammoths.

=The Dutch and the English.=--From the very beginning there was a
quiet jealousy between the Dutch Settlement on the Hudson and the
English Settlers in Massachusetts. To quote from an old English
history, "it was the original purpose of the Pilgrims to locate near
Nova Scotia, but, upon better consideration, they decided to seat
themselves more to the southward on the bank of Hudson's River which
falls into the sea at New York."

To this end "they contracted with some merchants who were willing
to be adventurers with them in their intended settlement and were
proprietors of the country, but the contract bore too heavy upon them,
and made them the more easy in their disappointment. Their agents in
England hired the Mayflower, and, after a stormy voyage, 'fell in with
Cape Cod on the 9th of November. Here they refreshed themselves about
half a day and then tacked about to the southward for Hudson's River.'

"Encountering a storm they became entangled in dangerous shoals and
breakers and were driven back again to the Cape." Thus Plymouth became
the first English settlement of New England. Another historian says
that it was their purpose "to settle on the Connecticut Coast near
Fairfield County, lying between the Connecticut and Hudson's River."

       * * *

          Before his sight
  Flowed the fair river free and bright,
  The rising mist and Isles of Bay,
  Before him in their glory lay.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

From the very first the Dutch occupation was considered by the English
as illegal. It was undoubtedly part of the country the coasts of which
were first viewed by Sebastian Cabot, who sailed with five English
ships from Bristol in May, 1498, and as such was afterwards included
in the original province of Virginia. It was also within the limits of
the country granted by King James to the Western Company, but, before
it could be settled, the Dutch occupancy took place, and, in the
interest of peace, a license was granted by King James.

The Dutch thus made their settlement before the Puritans were planted
in New England, and from their first coming, "being seated in Islands
and at the mouth of a good river their plantations were in a thriving
condition, and they begun, in Holland, to promise themselves vast
things from their new colony."

Sir Samuel Argal in 1617 or 1618, on his way from Virginia to New
Scotland, insulted the Dutch and destroyed their plantations. "To
guard against further molestations they secured a License from
King James to build Cottages and to plant for traffic as well as
subsistence, pretending it was only for the conveniency of their ships
touching there for fresh water and fresh provisions in their voyage
to Brazil; but they little by little extended their limits every way,
built Towns, fortified them and became a flourishing colony."

"In an island called Manhattan, at the mouth of Hudson's River, they
built a City which they called New Amsterdam, and the river was called
by them the Great River. The bay to the east of it had the name of
Nassau given to it. About one hundred and fifty miles up the River
they built a Fort which they called Orange Fort and from thence drove
a profitable trade with the Indians who came overland as far as from
Quebec to deal with them."

The Dutch Colonies were therefore in a very thriving condition when
they were attacked by the English. The justice of this war has been
freely criticised even by English writers, "because troops were sent
to attack New Amsterdam before the Colony had any notice of the war."

       * * *

                      On his view
  Ocean, and earth, and heaven burst before him,
    Clouds slumbering at his feet and the clear blue
  Of summer's sky in beauty bending o'er him.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

The "Encyclopaedia Britannica" thus briefly puts the history of those
far-off days when New York was a town of about 1500 inhabitants: "The
English Government was hostile to any other occupation of the New
World than its own. In 1621 James I. claimed sovereignty over New
Netherland by right of 'occupancy.' In 1632 Charles I. reasserted the
English title of 'first discovery, occupation and possession.' In 1654
Cromwell ordered an expedition for its conquest and the New England
Colonies had engaged their support. The treaty with Holland arrested
their operations and recognized the title of the Dutch. In 1664
Charles the Second resolved upon a conquest of New Netherland. The
immediate excuse was the loss to the revenue of the English Colonies
by the smuggling practices of their Dutch neighbors. A patent was
granted to the Duke of York giving to him all the lands and rivers
from the west side of the Connecticut River to the east side of
Delaware Bay."

"On the 29th of August an English Squadron under the direction of Col.
Richard Nicolls, the Duke's Deputy Governor, appeared off the Narrows,
and on Sept. 8th New Amsterdam, defenseless against the force, was
formally surrendered by Stuyvesant. In 1673 (August 7th) war being
declared between England and Holland a Dutch squadron surprised New
York, captured the City and restored the Dutch authority, and the
names of New Netherland and New Amsterdam. But in July, 1674, a treaty
of peace restored New York to English rule. A new patent was issued to
the Duke of York, and Major Edmund Andros was appointed Governor."

=New York.=--On the 10th of November, 1674, the Province of New
Netherland was surrendered to Governor Major Edmund Andros on behalf
of his Britannic Majesty. The letter sent by Governor Andros to the
Dutch Governor is interesting in this connection: "Being arrived
to this place with orders to receive from you in the behalf of his
Majesty of Great Britain, pursuant to the late articles of peace with
the States Generals of the United Netherlands, the New Netherlands and
Dependencies, now under your command, I have herewith, by Capt. Philip
Carterett and Ens. Caesar Knafton, sent you the respective orders from
the said States General, the States of Zealand and Admirality of
Amsterdam to that effect, and desire you'll please to appoint some
short time for it. Our soldiers having been long aboard, I pray you
answer by these gentlemen, and I shall be ready to serve you in what
may lay in my power. Being from aboard his Majesty's ship, 'The
Diamond,' at anchor near. Your very humble servant. Staten Island this
22d Oct., 1674." After nineteen days' deliberation, which greatly
annoyed Governor Andros, New Amsterdam was transferred from Dutch to
English authority.

       * * *

  All white with sails thy keel-thronged waters flee
  Through one rich lapse of plenty to the sea.

  _Knickerbocker Magazine._

       * * *

"In 1683 Thomas Dongan succeeded Andros. A general Assembly, the first
under the English rule, met in October, 1683, and adopted a Charter
of Liberties, which was confirmed by the Duke. In August, 1684, a new
covenant was made with the Iroquois, who formally acknowledged the
jurisdiction of Great Britain, but not subjection. By the accession of
the Duke of York to the English throne the Duchy of New York became a
royal province. The Charters of the New England Colonies were revoked,
and together with New York and New Jersey they were consolidated into
the dominion of New England. Dongan was recalled and Sir Edmund Andros
was commissioned Governor General. He assumed his vice regal authority
August 11, 1688. The Assembly which James had abolished in 1686 was
reestablished, and in May declared the rights and privileges of
the people, reaffirming the principles of the repealed Charter of
Liberties of October 30, 1683."

       * * *

  "Queen of all lovely rivers, lustrous queen
  Of flowing waters in our sweet new lands,
  Rippling through sunlight to the ocean sands."

  _Anonymous._

       * * *

From this time on to the Revolution of 1776 there is one continual
struggle between the Royal Governors and the General Assembly. The
Governor General had the power of dissolving the Assembly, but
the Assembly had the power of granting money. British troops were
quartered in New York which increased the irritation. The conquest of
Canada left a heavy burden upon Great Britain, a part of which their
Parliament attempted to shift to the shoulders of the Colonies.

A general Congress of the Colonies, held in New York in 1765,
protested against the Stamp Act and other oppressive ordinances and
they were in part repealed.

=A Page of Patriotism.=--During the long political agitation New York,
the most English of the Colonies in her manners and feelings, was in
close harmony with the Whig leaders of England. She firmly adhered to
the principle of the sovereignty of the people which she had inscribed
on her ancient "Charter of Liberties." Although largely dependent upon
commerce she was the first to recommend a non-importation of English
merchandise as a measure of retaliation against Britain, and she was
the first also to invite a general congress of all the Colonies.
On the breaking out of hostilities New York immediately joined the
patriot cause. The English authority was overthrown and the government
passed to a provincial congress.

       * * *

  The union of lakes--the union of lands--
    The union of States none can sever--
  The union of hearts--the union of hands--
    And the Flag of our Union forever.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *

=New York Sons of Liberty.=--In 1767, in the eighth year of the reign
of George III. there was issued a document in straightforward Saxon,
and Sir Henry Moore, Governor-in-Chief over the Province of New York,
offered fifty pounds to discover the author or authors. The paper read
as follows: "Whereas, a glorious stand for Liberty did appear in
the Resentment shown to a Set of Miscreants under the Name of Stamp
Masters, in the year 1765, and it is now feared that a set of Gentry
called Commissioners (I do not mean those lately arrived at Boston),
whose odious Business is of a similar nature, may soon make their
appearance amongst us in order to execute their detestable office:
It is therefore hoped that every votary of that celestial Goddess
Liberty, will hold themselves in readiness to give them a proper
welcome. Rouse, my Countrymen, Rouse! (Signed) _Pro Patria_."

In December, 1769, a stirring address "To the Betrayed Inhabitants of
the City and County of New York," signed by a Son of Liberty, was
also published, asking the people to do their duty in matters pending
between them and Britain. "Imitate," the writer said, "the noble
examples of the friends of Liberty in England; who, rather than be
enslaved, contend for their rights with king, lords and commons;
and will you suffer your liberties to be torn from you by your
Representatives? tell it not in Boston; publish it not in the streets
of Charles-town. You have means yet left to preserve a unanimity
with the brave Bostonians and Carolinians; and to prevent the
accomplishment of the designs of tyrants."

Another proclamation, offering a reward of fifty pounds, was
published by the "Honorable Cadwalader Colden, Esquire, His Majesty's
Lieutenant-Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Province of New York
and the territories depending thereon in America," with another "God
Save the King" at the end of it. But the people who commenced to write
Liberty with a capital letter and the word "king" in lower case type
were not daunted. Captain Alexander McDougal was arrested as
the supposed author. He was imprisoned eighty-one days. He was
subsequently a member of the Provincial Convention, in 1775 was
appointed Colonel of the first New York Regiment, and in 1777 rose to
the rank of Major-General in the U. S. Army. New York City could well
afford a monument to the Sons of Liberty. She has a right to emphasize
this period of her history, for her citizens passed the first
resolution to import nothing from the mother country, burned ten boxes
of stamps sent from England before any other colony or city had made
even a show of resistance, and when the Declaration was read, pulled
down the leaden statue of George III. from its pedestal in Bowling
Green, and moulded it into Republican bullets.

       * * *

  And not a verdant glade or mountain hoary,
  But treasures up within the glorious story.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

In 1699 the population of New York was about 6,000. In 1800, it
reached 60,000; and the growth since that date is almost incredible.
It is amusing to hear elderly people speak of the "outskirts of the
city" lying close to the City Hall, and of the drives _in the country_
above Canal Street. In the Documentary History of New York, a map of
a section of New York appears as it was in 1793, when the Gail, Work
House, and Bridewell occupied the site of the City Hall, with two
ponds to the north--East Collect Pond and Little Collect Pond,--sixty
feet deep and about a quarter of a mile in diameter, the outlet of
which crossed Broadway at Canal Street and found its way to the
Hudson.

=Greater New York.=--In 1830, the population of Manhattan was 202,000;
in 1850, 515,000; in 1860, 805,000; in 1870, 942,000; in 1880,
1,250,000; in 1892, 1,801,739; and is now rapidly approaching three
million. Brooklyn, which in 1800 had a population of only 2,000, now
contributes, as the "Borough of Brooklyn," almost two million. So that
Greater New York is the centre of about six million of people within a
radius of fifteen miles including her New Jersey suburbs with almost
five millions under one municipality.

=Brooklyn.=--In June, 1636, was bought the first land on Long Island;
and in 1667 the Ferry Town, opposite New York, was known by the name
"Breuckelen," signifying "broken land," but the name was not generally
accepted until after the Revolution. Columbia Heights, Prospect Park,
Clinton Avenue, St. Mark's Place and Stuyvesant Heights are among the
favored spots for residence.

       * * *

  Behind us lies the teeming town
    With lust of gold grown frantic;
  Before us glitters o'er the bay
    The peaceable Atlantic.

  _Charles Mackay_

       * * *

=Jersey City= occupies the ground once known as Paulus Hook, the farm
of William Kieft, Director General of the Dutch West India Company.
Its water front, from opposite Bartholdi Statue to Hoboken, is
conspicuously marked by Railroad Terminal Piers, Factories, Elevators,
etc. Bergen is the oldest settlement in New Jersey. It was founded in
1616 by Dutch Colonists to the New Netherlands, and received its name
from Bergen in Norway. Jersey City is practically a part of Greater
New York, but state lines make municipal union impossible.

=Hudson River Steamboats.=--An accurate history of the growth and
development of steam navigation on the Hudson, from the building of
the "Clermont" by Robert Fulton to the building of the superb steamers
of the Hudson River Day Line would form a very interesting book. The
first six years produced six steamers:

      Clermont, built in 1807          160 tons
      Car of Neptune, built in 1809    295  "
      Hope, built in 1811              280  "
      Perseverance, built in 1811      280  "
      Paragon, built in 1811           331  "
      Richmond, built in 1813          370  "

It makes one smile to read the newspaper notices of those days. The
time was rather long, and the fare rather high--thirty-six hours to
Albany, fare seven dollars.

    _From the Albany Gazette, September, 1807._

    "The North River Steamboat will leave Paulus Hook Ferry on Friday
    the 4th of September, at 9 in the morning, and arrive at Albany
    at 9 in the afternoon on Saturday. Provisions, good berths, and
    accommodation are provided. The charge to each passenger is as
    follows:

      To Newburg        Dols. 3,     Time 14 hours.
         Poughkeepsie     "   4,       "  17  "
         Esopus           "   5,       "  20  "
         Hudson           "   51/2,      "  30  "
         Albany           "   7,       "  36  "

    For places apply to Wm. Vandervoort, No. 48 Courtland street, on
    the corner of Greenwich street, September 2d, 1807."

       * * *

  The wind blew over the land and the waves
    With its salt sea-breath, and a spicy balm,
  And it seemed to cool my throbbing brain,
    And lend my spirit its gusty calm.

  _Richard Henry Stoddard._

       * * *

    _Extract from the New York Evening Post, October 2, 1807._

    Mr. Fulton's new-invented steamboat, which is fitted up in a neat
    style for passengers, and is intended to run from New York to
    Albany as a packet, left here this morning with ninety passengers,
    against a strong head wind. Notwithstanding which, it is judged
    that she moved through the waters at the rate of six miles an
    hour.

    _Extract from the Albany Gazette, October 5th, 1807._

    Friday, October 2d, 1807, the steamboat (Clermont) left New York
    at ten o'clock a.m., against a stormy tide, very rough water, and
    a violent gale from the north. She made a headway beyond the most
    sanguine expectations, and without being rocked by the waves.

    Arrived at Albany, October 4th, at 10 o'clock p.m., being detained
    by being obliged to come to anchor, owing to a gale and having one
    of her paddle wheels torn away by running foul of a sloop.

       * * *

  But see! the broadening river deeper flows,
  Its tribute floods intent to reach the sea.

  _Park Benjamin._

       * * *

The following was recently recopied in the _Poughkeepsie Eagle_, as an
old time reminiscence:

    =To Poughkeepsie from New York in Seventeen Hours.=

    --The first steamboat on the Hudson River passed Poughkeepsie
    August 17th, 1807, and in June, 1808, the owners of the boat
    caused the following advertisement to be published in prominent
    papers along the river:

    =STEAMBOAT.=

    FOR THE INFORMATION OF THE PUBLIC.

    The Steamboat will leave New York for Albany every Saturday
    afternoon exactly at 6 o'clock, and will pass:

      West Point, about 4 o'clock Sunday morning.
      Newburgh, 7 o'clock Sunday morning.
      Poughkeepsie, 11 o'clock Sunday morning.
      Esopus, 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
      Red Hook, 4 o'clock in the afternoon.
      Catskill, 7 o'clock in the afternoon.
      Hudson, 8 o'clock in the evening.

    She will leave Albany for New York every Wednesday morning exactly
    at 8 o'clock, and pass:

      Hudson, about 3 in the afternoon.
      Esopus, 8 in the evening.
      Poughkeepsie, 12 at night.
      Newburgh, 4 Thursday morning.
      West Point, 7 Thursday morning.

    As the time at which the boat may arrive at the different places
    above mentioned may vary an hour, more or less, according to the
    advantage or disadvantage of wind and tide, those who wish to
    come on board will see the necessity of being on the spot an hour
    before the time. Persons wishing to come on board from any other
    landing than these here specified can calculate the time the boat
    will pass and be ready on her arrival. Innkeepers or boatmen who
    bring passengers on board or take them ashore from any part of the
    river will be allowed one shilling for each person.

    PRICES OF PASSAGE--FROM NEW YORK.

      To West Point               $2 30
      To Newburgh                  3 00
      To Poughkeepsie              3 50
      To Esopus                    4 00
      To Red Hook                  4 50
      To Hudson                    5 00
      To Albany                    7 00

          FROM ALBANY.

      To Hudson                   $2 00
      To Red Hook                  3 00
      To Esopus                    3 50
      To Poughkeepsie              4 00
      To Newburgh and West Point   4 50
      To New York                  7 00

    All other passengers are to pay at the rate of one dollar for
    every twenty miles, and a half dollar for every meal they may eat.

    Children from 1 to 5 years of age to pay one-third price and to
    sleep with persons under whose care they are.

    Young persons from 5 to 15 years of age to pay half price,
    provided they sleep two in a berth, and the whole price for each
    one who requests to occupy a whole berth.

    Servants who pay two-thirds price are entitled to a berth; they
    pay half price if they do not have a berth.

    Every person paying full price is allowed sixty pounds of baggage;
    if less than full price forty pounds. They are to pay at the rate
    of three cents per pound for surplus baggage. Storekeepers who
    wish to carry light and valuable merchandise can be accommodated
    on paying three cents a pound.

       * * *

  By palace, village, cot, a sweet surprise
    At every turn the vision looks upon;
  Till to our wondering and uplifted eyes
    The Highland rocks and hills in solemn grandeur rise.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

=Day Line Steamers.=--As the cradle of successful steam navigation was
rocked on the Hudson, it is fitting that the Day Line Steamers should
excel all others in beauty, grace and speed. There is no comparison
between these river palaces and the steamboats on the Rhine or any
river in Europe, as to equipment, comfort and rapidity. To make
another reference to the great tourist route of Europe, the distance
from Cologne to Coblenz is 60 miles, the same as from New York to
Newburgh. It takes the Rhine steamers from seven to eight hours (as
will be seen in Baedeker's Guide to that river) going up the stream,
and from four and a half to five hours returning with the current. The
Hudson by Daylight steamers en route to Albany make the run from New
York to Newburgh in three hours; to Poughkeepsie in four hours, making
stops at Yonkers, West Point and Newburgh. Probably no train on the
best equipped railroad in our country reaches its stations with
greater regularity than these steamers make their various landing.
It astonishes a Mississippi or Missouri traveler to see the captain
standing like a train-conductor, with watch in hand, to let off the
gang-plank and pull the bell, at the very moment of the advertised
schedule.

       * * *

  Southward the river gleams--a snowy sail
    Now gliding o'er the mirror--now a track
  Tossing with foam displaying on its course
    The graceful steamer with its flag of smoke.

  _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

One of the most humorous incidents of the writer's journeying up and
down the Hudson, was the "John-Gilpin-experience" of a western man who
got off at West Point a few years ago. It was at that time the first
landing of the steamer after leaving New York.

As he was accustomed to the Mississippi style of waiting at the
various towns he thought he would go up and take a look at the "hill."
The boat was off and "so was he"; with wife and children shaking their
hands and handkerchiefs in an excited manner from the gang-plank. Some
one at the stern of the steamer shouted to him to cross the river and
take the train to Poughkeepsie.

Every one was on the lookout for him at the Poughkeepsie landing, and,
just as the steamer was leaving the dock, he came dashing down Main
street from the railroad station, but too late. Then not only wife
and children but the entire boat saluted him and the crowded
deck blossomed with handkerchiefs. Some one shouted "catch us at
Rhinebeck." After leaving Rhinebeck the train appeared, and on passing
the steamer, a lone handkerchief waved from the rear of the platform.
At Hudson an excited but slightly disorganized gentleman appeared
to the great delight of his family, and every one else, for the
passengers had all taken a lively interest in the chase. "Well," he
says, "I declare, the way this boat lands, and gets off again, beats
anything I ever see, and I have lived on the Mississippi nigh on to a
quarter of a century."

       * * *

    While drinking in the scene, my mind goes back upon
    the tide of years, and lo, a vision! On its upward
    path the "Half-Moon" glides.

    _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

=The "Hendrick Hudson."= In these centennial days of discovery
and invention, a description of the steamers will be of interest,
furnished by the Hudson River Day Line. The "Hendrick Hudson" was
built at Newburgh by the Marvel Company, under contract with the W.
& A. Fletcher Company of New York, who built her engines, and under
designs from Frank E. Kirby. Her principal dimensions are: length, 400
feet; breadth over all, 82 feet; depth of hold, 14 feet 5 inches, and
a draft of 7 feet 6 inches. Her propelling machinery is what is
known as the 3-cylinder compound direct acting engine, and her power
(6,500-horse) is applied through side wheels with feathering buckets,
and steam is supplied from eight boilers.

Steel has been used in her construction to such an extent that her
hull, her bulk-heads (7 in all), her engine and boiler enclosures, her
kitchen and ventilators, her stanchions, girders, and deck beams, and
in fact the whole essential frame work of the boat is like a great
steel building. Where wood is used it is hard wood, and in finish
probably has no equal in marine work.

Her scheme of decoration, ventilation and sanitation is as artistic
and scientific as modern methods can produce, and at the same time
her general lay out for practical and comfortable operation is the
evolution of the long number of years in which the Day Line has been
conducting the passenger business.

A detailed account of this steamer would be a long story, but some of
the salient features are as follows: She carries the largest passenger
license ever issued, namely: for 5,000 people; on her trial trip she
made the fastest record through the water of any inland passenger ship
in this country, namely: 23.1 miles per hour. Her shafts are under the
main deck. Her mural paintings represent prominent features of the
Hudson, which may not be well seen from the steamer. Her equipment far
exceeds the requirements of the Government Inspection Laws.

       * * *

  We hear the murmur of the sea,--
    A monotone of sadness,
  But not a whisper of the crowd,
    Or echo of its madness.

  _Charles Mackay._

       * * *

=The "New York."= The hull of the "New York" was built at Wilmington,
Del., by the Harlan & Hollingsworth Co., in 1887, and is, with the
exception of the deck-frame, made of iron throughout. During the
winter of 1897 she was lengthened 30 feet, and now measures 341 feet
in length, breadth over all 74 feet, with a tonnage of 1975 gross
tons. The engine was built by the W. & A. Fletcher Co. of New York.
It is a standard American beam engine, with a cylinder 75 inches in
diameter and 12 feet stroke of piston, and develops 3,850 horse power.
Steam steering gear is used. One of the most admirable features of
this queen of river steamers is her "feathering" wheels, the use of
which not only adds materially to her speed but does away with the
jar or tremor common to boats having the ordinary paddle-wheels. The
exterior of the "New York" is, as usual, of pine, painted white and
relieved with tints and gold. The interior is finished in hard-wood
cabinet work, ash being used forward of the shaft on the main deck,
and mahogany aft and in the dining-room. Ash is also used in the grand
saloons on the promenade deck. One feature of these saloons especially
worthy of note, is the number and size of the windows, which are so
numerous as to almost form one continuous window. Seated in one of
these elegant saloons as in a floating palace of glass, the tourist
who prefers to remain inside enjoys equally with those outside the
unrivalled scenery through which the steamer is passing. The private
parlors on the "New York" are provided with bay windows and are
very luxuriantly furnished. In the saloons are paintings by Albert
Bierstadt, J. F. Cropsey, Walter Satterlee and David Johnson. The
dining-room on the "New York" is located on the main deck, aft; a
feature that will commend itself to tourists, since while enjoying
their meals they will not be deprived from viewing the noble scenery
through which the steamer is passing. While the carrying capacity of
the "New York" is 4,500 passengers, license for 2,500 only is applied
for, thus guaranteeing ample room for all and the absence from
crowding which is so essential to comfort.

       * * *

  Thy fate and mine are not repose,
  And ere another evening close
  Thou to thy tides shall turn again
  And I to seek the crowd of men.

  _William Cullen Byrant._

       * * *

=The "Albany"= was built by the Harlan & Hollingsworth Co., of
Wilmington, Del., in 1880. During the winter of 1892, she was
lengthened thirty feet and furnished with modern feathering wheels
in place of the old style radial ones. Her hull is of iron, 325 feet
long, breadth of beam over all 75 feet, and her tonnage is 1,415 gross
tons. Her engine was built by the W. & A. Fletcher Co., of New York,
and develops 3,200 horse power. The stroke is 12 feet, and the
diameter of the cylinder is 73 inches. On her trial trip she ran from
New York to Poughkeepsie, a distance of 75 miles, in three hours and
seven minutes. Steam steering gear is used on the "Albany," thus
insuring ease and precision in handling her. The wood-work on the main
deck and in the upper saloons is all hard wood; mahogany, ash and
maple tastefully carved. Wide, easy staircases lead to the main saloon
and upper decks. Rich Axminster carpets cover the floors, and mahogany
tables and furniture of antique design and elegant finish make up the
appointments of a handsomely furnished drawing room.

       * * *

  Lose not a memory of the glorious scenes,
  Mountains and palisades, and leaning rocks.

  _William Wallace._

       * * *

=The Old Reaches.=--Early navigators divided the Hudson into fourteen
"reaches" or distances from point to point as seen by one sailing up
or down the river. In the slow days of uncertain sailing vessels these
divisions meant more than in our time of "propelling steam," but they
are still of practical and historic interest.

The Great Chip Rock Reach extends from above Weehawken about eighteen
miles to the boundary line of New York and New Jersey--(near
Piermont). The Palisades were known by the old Dutch settlers as the
"Great Chip," and so styled in the Bergen Deed of Purchase, viz, the
great chip above Weehawken. The _Tappan_ Reach (on the east side of
which dwelt the Manhattans, and on the west side the Saulrickans and
the Tappans), extends about seven miles to Teller's Point. The
third reach to a narrow point called _Haverstroo_; then comes the
_Seylmaker's_ Reach, then _Crescent_ Reach; next _Hoge's_ Reach, and
then _Vorsen_ Reach, which extends to Klinkersberg, or Storm King,
the northern portal of the Highlands. This is succeeded by _Fisher's_
Reach where, on the east side once dwelt a race of savages called
Pachami. "This reach," in the language of De Laet, "extends to another
narrow pass, where, on the west, is a point of land which juts out,
covered with sand, opposite a bend in the river, on which another
nation of savages--the Waoranecks--have their abode at a place called
Esopus. Next, another reach, called _Claverack_; then _Backerack;_
next _Playsier_ Reach, and _Vaste_ Reach, as far as Hinnenhock; then
_Hunter's_ Reach, as far as Kinderhook; and Fisher's Hook, near Shad
Island, over which, on the east side, dwell the Mahicans." If these
reaches seem valueless at present there are

=Five Divisions of the Hudson=--which possess interest for all, as
they present an analysis easy to be remembered--divisions marked by
something more substantial than sentiment or fancy, expressing five
distinct characteristics:--

1. THE PALISADES, an unbroken wall of rock for fifteen
miles--GRANDEUR.

2. THE TAPPAN ZEE, surrounded by the sloping hills of Nyack,
Tarrytown, and Sleepy Hollow--REPOSE.

3. THE HIGHLANDS, where the Hudson for twenty miles plays "hide and
seek" with "hills rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun"--SUBLIMITY.

4. THE HILLSIDES for miles above and below Poughkeepsie--THE
PICTURESQUE.

5. THE CATSKILLS, on the west, throned in queenly dignity--BEAUTY.

       * * *

                On the deck
  Stands the bold Hudson, gazing at the sights
  Opening successive--point and rock and hill,
  Majestic mountain-top, and nestling vale.

  _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *


=SUGGESTIONS.=

From the Hurricane Deck of the Hudson River Day Line Steamers can
be seen, on leaving or approaching the Metropolis, one of the most
interesting panoramas in the world--the river life of Manhattan,
the massive structures of Broadway, the great Transatlantic docks,
Recreation Piers, and an ever-changing kaleidoscope of interest. The
view is especially grand on the down trip between the hours of five
and six in the afternoon, as the western sun brings the city in strong
relief against the sky. If tourists wish to fully enjoy this beautiful
view they should remain on the Hurricane Deck until the boat is well
into her Desbrosses Street slip.

=The Brooklyn Annex.=--The Brooklyn tourist is especially happy in
this delightful preface and addenda to the Hudson River trip. The
effect of morning and evening light in bringing out or in subduing the
sky-line of Manhattan is nowhere seen to greater advantage. In the
morning the buildings from the East River side stand out bold and
clear, when lo! almost instantaneously, on turning the Battery, they
are lessened and subdued. On the return trip in the evening, the
effect is reversed--a study worth the while of the traveler as he
passes to and fro on the commodious "Annex" between Desbrosses
Street Pier and Brooklyn. Surely no other city in the world rises so
beautiful from harbor line or water front as "Greater New York," with
lofty outlines of the boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn reminding one
of Scott's tribute to Edinburgh:

  "Piled deep and massy, close and high,
  Mine own romantic town!"

       * * *

    Down at the end of the long, dark street,
      Years, years ago,
    I sat with my sweetheart on the pier,
      Watching the river flow.

  _Richard Henry Stoddard._

       * * *

[Illustration: STATUE OF LIBERTY]




=NEW YORK TO ALBANY.=


=Desbrosses Street Pier to Forty-Second Street.=

Our historic journey fittingly begins at Desbrosses Street, for here,
near the old River-front, extending from Desbrosses along Greenwich,
stood the Revolutionary line of breastworks reaching south to the
Grenadier Battery at Franklin Street. Below this were "Jersey,"
"McDougall" and "Oyster" batteries and intervening earthworks to Port
George, on the Battery, which stood on the site of old Fort Amsterdam,
carrying us back to Knickerbocker memories of Peter Stuyvesant and
Wowter Van Twiller. The view from the after-deck, before the steamer
leaves the pier, gives scope for the imagination to re-picture the
far-away primitive and heroic days of early New York.

=Desbrosses Street Pier.=--On leaving the lower landing a charming
view is obtained of New York Harbor, the Narrows, Staten Island, the
Bartholdi Statue of Liberty, and, in clear weather, far away to the
South, the Highlands of Nevisink, the first land to greet the eye
of the ocean voyager. As the steamer swings out into the stream the
tourist is at once face to face with a rapidly changing panorama.
Steamers arriving, with happy faces on their decks, from southern
ports or distant lands; others with waving handkerchiefs bidding
good-bye to friends on crowded docks; swift-shuttled ferry-boats, with
hurrying passengers, supplying their homespun woof to the great warp
of foreign or coastwise commerce; noisy tug-boats, sombre as dray
horses, drawing long lines of canal boats, or proud in the convoy of
some Atlantic greyhound that has not yet slipped its leash; dignified
"Men of War" at anchor, flying the flags of many nations, happy
excursion boats _en route_ to sea-side resorts, scows, picturesque
in their very clumsiness and uncouthness--all unite in a living
kaleidescope of beauty.

       * * *

  Rise, stately symbol! Holding forth
    Thy light and hope to all who sit
  In chains and darkness! Belt the earth
    With watch-fires from thy torch uplit!

  _John Greenleaf Whittier._

       * * *

Across the river on the Jersey Shore are seen extensive docks of great
railways, with elevators and stations that seem like "knotted ends"
of vast railway lines, lest they might forsooth, untwist and become
irrecoverably tangled in approaching the Metropolis. Prominent among
these are the _Pennsylvania Railroad_ for the South and West; the
_Erie Railway_, the _Delaware, Lackawanna and Western_, and to the
North above Hoboken the _West Shore_, serving also as starting point
for the _New York, Ontario and Western_. Again the eye returns to
the crowded wharves and warehouses of New York, reaching from Castle
Garden beyond 30th Street, with forest-like masts and funnels of ocean
steamships, and then to prominent buildings mounting higher and higher
year by year along the city horizon, marking the course of Broadway
from the Battery, literally fulfilling the humor of Knickerbocker
in not leaving space for a breath of air for the top of old Trinity
Church spire.

=Stevens' Castle.=--About midway between Desbrosses Street and 42d
Street Pier will be seen on the Jersey Shore a wooded point with
sightly building, known as Stevens' Castle, home of the late Commodore
Stevens, founder of the Stevens Institute of Technology. Above this
are the Elysian Fields, near the river bank, known in early days as a
quiet resort but now greatly changed in the character of its visitors.
On the left will also be seen the dome and tower of St. Michael's
Monastery, and above this Union Hill.

=The Trap Rock Ridge=, which begins to show itself above the Elysian
Fields, increases gradually in height to the brow of the Palisades.
West of Bergen Heights and Union Hill flows the Hackensack River
parallel to the Hudson, and at this point only about two miles
distant.

       * * *

  How still with all her towers and domes
    The city sleeps on yonder shore,--
  How many thousand happy homes
    Yon starless sky is bending o'er.

  _Park Benjamin._

       * * *

=Forty-Second Street to One Hundred and Twenty-Ninth.=

=The 42d Street Pier= is now at hand, convenient of access to
travelers, as the 42d Street car line crosses Manhattan intersecting
every "up and down" surface, subway or elevated road in the City,
as does also the Grand, Vestry and Desbrosses Street at the lower
landing. While passengers are coming aboard we take pleasure in
quoting the following from Baedeker's Guide to the United States: "The
Photo-Panorama of the Hudson, published by the Bryant Union Publishing
Co., New York City (price 50 cents), shows both sides of the river
from New York to Albany, accurately represented from 800 consecutive
photographs. This new and complete object-guide will be of service
to the tourist, and can be had at the steamers' news stands, head of
grand stairway, or it will be sent by publishers, postpaid, on receipt
of price."

=Weehawken= with its sad story of the duel between Hamilton and Burr
is soon seen upon the west bank. A monument once marked the spot,
erected by the St. Andrews Society of New York City on the ledge of
rock where Hamilton fell early in the morning of the eleventh of July,
1804. The quarrel between this great statesman and his malignant rival
was, perhaps, more personal than political. It is said that Hamilton,
in accordance with the old-time code of honor, accepted the challenge,
but fired into the air, while Burr with fiendish cruelty took
deliberate revenge. Burr was never forgiven by the citizens of New
York and from that hour walked its streets shunned and despised. Among
the many poetic tributes penned at the time to the memory of Hamilton,
perhaps the best was by a poet whose name is now scarcely remembered,
Mr. Robert C. Sands. A fine picture of Hamilton will be found in the
New York Chamber of Commerce where the writer was recently shown the
following concise paragraph from Talleyrand: "The three greatest men
of my time, in my opinion, were Napoleon Bonaparte, Charles James Fox
and Alexander Hamilton and the greatest of the three was Hamilton."

       * * *

  Where round yon capes the banks ascend
  Long shall the pilgrim's footsteps bend,
  There, mirthful heart shall pause to sigh,
  There tears shall dim the patriot's eye.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

The plain marble slab which stood in the face of the monument is still
preserved by a member of the King family. It is thirty-six inches
long by twenty-six and a half inches wide and bears the following
inscription: "As an expression of their affectionate regard to his
Memory and their deep regret for his loss, the St. Andrew's Society of
the State of New York have erected this Monument."

Quite a history attaches to this stone (graphically condensed by
an old gardener of the King estate): "It stood in the face of the
monument for sixteen years, and was read by thousands, but by 1820 the
pillar had become an eyesore to the enlightened public sentiment of
the age, and an agitation was begun in the public prints for its
removal. It was not, however, organized effort, but the order of one
man, that at length demolished the pillar. This man was Captain Deas,
a peace-loving gentleman, strongly opposed to duelling and brawls,
and on seeing a party approaching the grounds often interposed and
sometimes succeeded in effecting a reconciliation. He became tired of
seeing the pillar in his daily walks, and, in 1820, ordered his men to
remove it and deposit the slab containing the inscription in one
of the outbuildings of the estate. This was done. But a few months
afterward the slab was stolen, and nothing more was heard of it until
thirteen years later, when Mr. Hugh Maxwell, president of the St.
Andrew's Society, discovered it in a junk shop in New York. He at once
purchased it and presented it to Mr. James G. King, who about this
time came into possession of the Deas property, where it has since
been carefully preserved."

This mansion of Captain Deas afterward known as the "King House on the
Cliff" was a stately residence where Washington Irving used to come
and dream of his fair Manhattan across the river. It was also the
head-quarters of Lafayette, after the battle of Brandywine.

       * * *

    I was an admirer of General Hamilton, and I sicken
    when I think of our political broils, slanders and enmities.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

The gardener also said: "the river road beneath us is cut directly
through the spot. Originally it was simply a narrow and grassy shelf
close up under the cliffs, six feet wide and eleven paces long. A
great cedar tree stood at one end, and this sandbowlder, which we have
also preserved, was at the other. It was about twenty feet above
the river and was reached by a steep rocky path leading up from the
Hudson, and, as there was then no road or path even along the base
of the cliffs, it could be reached only by boats." The first duel at
Weehawken of which there is any record was in 1799, between Aaron Burr
and John B. Church (Hamilton's brother-in-law). The parties met and
exchanged shots; neither was wounded. The seconds then induced Church
to offer an apology and the affair terminated. The last duel was
fought there September 28, 1845, and ended in a farce, the pistols
being loaded with cork--a fitting termination to a relic of barbarism.

=Riverside Drive and Park.= Riverside Drive, on the east bank starting
at 72d Street, is pronounced the finest residential avenue in the
world. Distinguished among many noble residences is the home of
Charles M. Schwab at 73d Street, which cost two million dollars; built
on the New York Orphan Asylum plot for which he paid $860,000.

=The Soldiers and Sailors Monument=, 89th Street, a memorial to the
citizens of New York, who took part in the Civil War, a beautiful work
of art, circular in form, with Corinthian columns, erected by the city
at a cost of a quarter of million of dollars was dedicated May 30,
1902. The corner-stone was laid in 1900 by President Roosevelt, at
that time Governor. The location was well selected, and it presents
one of the most attractive features of the river front.

       * * *

  We celebrate our hundredth year
    With thankful hearts and words of praise,
  And learn a lasting lesson here
    Of trust and hope for coming days.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Columbia University=, on Morningside Heights, has a fine outlook,
crowning a noble site worthy of the old college, whose sons have been
to the fore since the days of the Revolution in promoting the glory
of the state and the nation. President Low has happily styled
"Morningside," which extends from 116th to 120th Streets, "The
Acropolis of the new world." The Library Building which he erected to
his father's memory, is of Greek architecture and cost $1,500,000. It
contains 300,000 volumes and is open night and day to the public. It
also marks the battle ground and American victory of Harlem Heights in
1776.

=The Cathedral of St. John the Divine= (Protestant Episcopal), now in
process of erection, occupies three blocks from 110th Street to 113th
between Morningside Park and Amsterdam Avenue. The corner stone was
laid in 1892 to be completed about 1940 at a cost of $6,000,000. The
crypt quarried out of the solid rock has been completed and services
are held in it every Sunday. Near at hand will be seen the beautiful
dome of St. Luke's Hospital.

=Grant's Tomb=, Riverside Drive and 123d Street, has the most
commanding site of the Hudson River front of New York. The bluff rises
130 feet and still retains the name of Claremont. The apex of
the memorial is 280 feet above the river. Ninety thousand people
contributed to the "Grant Monument Association fund" which, with
interest, aggregated $600,000. The corner stone was laid by President
Harrison in 1892 and dedicated April 27, 1897, on the seventy-fifth
anniversary of Grant's birth, with a great military, naval and civil
parade. The occasion was marked by an address of President McKinley
and an oration of Gen. Horace Porter, president of the Grant Monument
Association.

An attempt to remove Grant's body to Washington was made in Congress
but overwhelmingly defeated. The speech by Congressman Amos Cummings
in the House of Representatives, was a happy condensation of the
facts. He fittingly said: "New York was General Grant's chosen home.
He tried many other places but finally settled there. A house was
given to him here in Washington, but he abandoned it in the most
marked manner to buy one for himself in New York. He was a familiar
form upon her streets. He presided at her public meetings and at all
times took an active interest in her local affairs. He was perfectly
at home there and was charmed with its associations. It was the spot
on earth chosen by himself as the most agreeable to him; he meant to
live and die there. It was his home when he died. He closed his career
without ever once expressing a wish to leave it, but always to remain
in it.

"Men are usually buried at their homes. Washington was buried there;
Lincoln was buried there; Garibaldi was buried there; Gambetta was
buried there, and Ericsson was buried, not at the Capital of Sweden,
but at his own home. Those who say that New York is backward in giving
for any commendable thing either do not know her or they belie her.
Wherever in the civilized world there has been disaster by fire or
flood, or from earthquake or pestilence, she has been among the
foremost in the field of givers and has remained there when others
have departed. It is a shame to speak of her as parsimonious or as
failing in any benevolent duty. Those who charge her with being
dilatory should remember that haste is not always speed. It took more
than a quarter of a century to erect Bunker Hill Monument; the ladies
of Boston completed it. It took nearly half a century to erect a
monument to George Washington in the City founded by him, named for
him, and by his act made the Capital of the Nation; the Government
completed it. New York has already shown that she will do far better
than this."

* * *

  His glory as the centuries wide,
    His honor bright as sunlit seas,
  His lullaby the Hudson tide,
    His requiem the whispering breeze.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=The Thirteen Elm Trees=, about ten or fifteen minutes' walk from
General Grant's Tomb, were planted by Alexander Hamilton in his
door-yard, a century ago, to commemorate the thirteen original States.
This property was purchased by the late Hon. Orlando Potter, of New
York, with the following touch of patriotic sentiment: "These
famous trees are located in the northeast corner of One Hundred and
Forty-third street and Convent Avenue; or, on lots fourteen and
fifteen," said the auctioneer to the crowd that gathered at the sale.
"In order that the old property with the trees may be kept unbroken,
should the purchaser desire, we will sell lots 8 to 21 inclusive in
one batch! How much am I offered?" "One hundred thousand dollars,"
quietly responded Mr. Potter. A ripple of excitement ran through the
crowd, and the bid was quickly run up to $120,000 by speculators. "One
hundred and twenty-five thousand," said Mr. Potter. Then there were
several thousand dollar bids, and the auctioneer said: "Do I hear
one hundred and thirty?" Mr. Potter nodded. He nodded again at the
"thirty-five" and "forty" and then some one raised him $250. "Five
hundred," remarked Mr. Potter, and the bidding was done. "Sold for
$140,500!" cried the auctioneer. Mr. Potter smiled and drew his check
for the amount. "I can't say what I will do with the property," said
Mr. Potter. "You can rest assured, however, that the trees will not be
cut down."

       * * *

  Rest in peace by stately rivers martyred soldiers of the free,
  Rest brave captain, at our threshold, where the Hudson meets the sea.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Edgewater=, opposite Grant's Tomb on the west bank, lies between
Undercliff on the north and Shadyside on the south. The latter place
was made historic by Anthony Wayne's capture of supplies for the
American army in the summer of 1780 which formed the basis of a
satirical poem by Major Andre, entitled ="The Cow Chase."=

The steamer is now approaching 129th street, and we turn again with
pride to the beautiful tomb of General Grant which fittingly marks one
point of a great triangle of fame--the heroic struggle of the American
soldiers in 1776, the home of Alexander Hamilton, and the burial place
of the greatest soldier of the Civil War.

       * * *

  Woodman, spare that tree!
    Touch not a single bough!
  In youth it sheltered me,
    And I will protect it now.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *

=One Hundred and Twenty-Ninth Street to Yonkers.=

This upper landing of the Hudson River Day Line has a beautiful
location and is a great convenience to the dwellers of northern
Manhattan. On leaving the pier the steel-arched structure of
Riverside Drive is seen on the right. The valley here spanned, in the
neighborhood of 127th Street, was once known as "Marritje Davids'
Fly," and the local name for this part of New York above Claremont
Heights is still known as "Manhattanville." The Convent of the Sacred
Heart is visible among the trees, and

=Trinity Cemetery's Monuments= soon gleam along the wooded bank. Among
her distinguished dead is the grave of General John A. Dix whose words
rang across the land sixty days before the attack on Fort Sumter:
"If any man attempts to pull down the American flag shoot him on the
spot." The John A. Dix Post of New York comes hither each Decoration
Day and garlands with imposing ceremonies his grave and the graves of
their comrades.

Near Carmansville was the home of Audubon, the ornithologist, and the
residences above the cemetery are grouped together as Audubon Park.
Near at hand is the New York Institute for the Deaf and Dumb, and
pleasantly located near the shore the River House once known as
West-End Hotel.

=Washington Heights= rise in a bold bluff above Jeffrey's Hook. After
the withdrawal of the American army from Long Island, it became
apparent to General Washington and Hamilton that New York would have
to be abandoned. General Greene and Congress believed in maintaining
the fort, but future developments showed that Washington was right.
The American troops, so far as clothing or equipment was concerned,
were in a pitiable condition, and the result of the struggle makes one
of the darkest pages of the war. On the 12th of November Washington
started from Stony Point for Fort Lee and arrived the 13th, finding
to his disappointment that General Greene, instead of having made
arrangements for evacuating, was, on the contrary, reinforcing Fort
Washington. The entire defense numbered only about 2000 men, mostly
militia, with hardly a coat, to quote an English writer, "that was not
out at the elbows." "On the night of the 14th thirty flat-bottomed
boats stole quietly up the Hudson, passed the American forts
undiscovered, and made their way through Spuyten Duyvil Creek into
Harlem River. The means were thus provided for crossing that river,
and landing before unprotected parts of the American works."

       * * *

  Faith's pioneers and Freedom's martyrs sleep
  Beneath their shade: and under their old boughs
  The wise and brave of generations past
  Walked every Sabbath to the house of God.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

According to Irving, "On the 15th General Howe sent a summons to
surrender, with a threat of extremities should he have to carry the
place by assault." Magaw, in his reply, intimated a doubt that General
Howe would execute a threat "so unworthy of himself and the British
nation; but give me leave," added he, "to assure his Excellency, that,
actuated by the most glorious cause that mankind ever fought in, I am
determined to defend this post to the very last extremity."

"Apprised by the colonel of his peril, General Greene sent over
reinforcements, with an exhortation to him to persist in his
defense; and dispatched an express to General Washington, who was at
Hackensack, where the troops from Peekskill were encamped. It was
nightfall when Washington arrived at Fort Lee. Greene and Putnam were
over at the besieged fortress. He threw himself into a boat, and had
partly crossed the river, when he met those Generals returning. They
informed him of the garrison having been reinforced, and assured him
that it was in high spirits, and capable of making a good defense. It
was with difficulty, however, they could prevail on him to return with
them to the Jersey shore, for he was excessively excited."

       * * *

  Hark! Freedom's arms ring far and wide;
    Again these forts with beacons gleam;
  Loud cannon roar on every side--
    I start, I wake; I did but dream.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

"Early the next morning, Magaw made his dispositions for the expected
attack. His forces, with the recent addition, amounted to nearly three
thousand men. As the fort could not contain above a third of its
defenders, most of them were stationed about the outworks."

About noon, a heavy cannonade thundered along the rocky hills, and
sharp volleys of musketry, proclaimed that the action was commenced.

"Washington, surrounded by several of his officers, had been an
anxious spectator of the battle from the opposite side of the Hudson.
Much of it was hidden from him by intervening hills and forest; but
the roar of cannonry from the valley of the Harlem River, the sharp
and incessant reports of rifles, and the smoke rising above the
tree-tops, told him of the spirit with which the assault was received
at various points, and gave him for a time hope that the defense might
be successful. The action about the lines to the south lay open to
him, and could be distinctly seen through a telescope; and nothing
encouraged him more than the gallant style in which Cadwalader with
inferior force maintained his position. When he saw him however,
assailed in flank, the line broken, and his troops, overpowered by
numbers, retreating to the fort, he gave up the game as lost. The
worst sight of all, was to behold his men cut down and bayoneted by
the Hessians while begging quarter. It is said so completely to have
overcome him, that he wept with the tenderness of a child."

"Seeing the flag go into the fort from Knyphausen's division, and
surmising it to be a summons to surrender, he wrote a note to Magaw,
telling him if he could hold out until evening and the place could
not be maintained, he would endeavor to bring off the garrison in the
night. Capt. Gooch, of Boston, a brave and daring man, offered to be
the bearer of the note. He ran down to the river, jumped into a small
boat, pushed over the river, landed under the bank, ran up to the fort
and delivered the message, came out, ran and jumped over the broken
ground, dodging the Hessians, some of whom struck at him with their
pieces and others attempted to thrust him with their bayonets;
escaping through them, he got to his boat and returned to Fort Lee."

       * * *

    Up and down the valley of the Hudson the contending
    armies surged like the ebbing and flowing of the tides.

    _William Wait._

       * * *

Washington's message arrived too late. "The fort was so crowded by
the garrison and the troops which had retreated into it, that it was
difficult to move about. The enemy, too, were in possession of the
little redoubts around, and could have poured in showers of shells and
ricochet balls that would have made dreadful slaughter." It was no
longer possible for Magaw to get his troops to man the lines; he was
compelled, therefore, to yield himself and his garrison prisoners of
war. The only terms granted them were, that the men should retain
their baggage and the officers their swords.

=Fort Lee=, directly across the river, had a commanding position, but
was entirely useless to the Revolutionary army after the fall of Fort
Washington. It was therefore immediately abandoned to the British, as
was also Fort Constitution, another redoubt near at hand.

It will be remembered that the American army after long continued
disaster in and about New York, retreated southward from Fort Lee and
Hackensack to the Delaware, where Washington with a strategic stroke
brought dismay on his enemies and restored confidence to his friends
and the Patriots' Cause.

=The Palisades, or Great Chip Rock=, as they were known by the old
Dutch settlers, present the same bold front to the river that the
Giant's Causeway does to the ocean. Their height at Fort Lee, where
the bold cliffs first assert themselves, is three hundred feet, and
they extend about seventeen or eighteen miles to the hills of Rockland
County. A stroll along the summit reveals the fact that they are
almost as broken and fantastic in form as the great rocks along the
Elbe in Saxon-Switzerland.

       * * *

  The Palisades in sterner pride
  Tower as the gloom steals o'er the tide,
  For the great stream a bulwark meet
  That laves its rock-encumbered feet.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

As the basaltic trap-rock is one of the oldest geological formations,
we might still appropriately style the Palisades "a chip of the old
block." They separate the valley of the Hudson from the valley of the
Hackensack. The Hackensack rises in Rockland Lake opposite Sing Sing,
within two or three hundred yards of the Hudson, and the rivers flow
thirty miles side by side. Some geologists think that originally they
were one river, but they are now separated from each other by a wall
more substantial than even the 2,000 mile structure of the "Heathen
Chinee."

It might also be interesting to note Prof. Newberry's idea that in
pre-glacial times this part of the continent was several hundred feet
higher than at present, and that the Hudson was a very rapid stream
and much larger than now, draining as it did the Great Lakes: that the
St. Lawrence found its way through the Hudson Channel following pretty
nearly the line of the present Mohawk, and the great river emptied
into the Atlantic some 80 miles south of Staten Island. This idea is
confirmed by the soundings of the coast survey which discover the
ancient page of the Hudson as here indicated on the floor of the sea
far out where the ocean is 500 feet in depth. A speculation of what a
voyager a few million years ago would have then seen might, however,
as Hamlet observes, be "to consider somewhat too curiously" for
ordinary up-to-date tourists. But even, granting all this to be true,
the Palisades were already old, thrown up long ages before, between
a rift in the earth's surface, where it cooled in columnar form.
The rocky mould which held it, being of softer material, finally
disintegrated and crumbled away, leaving the cliff with its peculiar
perpendicular formation.

A recent writer has said: "The Palisades are among the wonders of the
world. Only three other places equal them in importance, but each of
the four is different from the others, and the Palisades are unique.
The Giant's Causeway on the north coast of Ireland, and the cliffs at
Kawaddy in India, are thought by many to have been the result of the
same upheaval of nature as the Palisades; but the Hudson rocks seem
to have preserved their entirety--to have come up in a body, as it
were--while the Giant's Causeway owes its celebrity to the ruined
state in which the Titanic forces of nature have left it. The third
wonder is at Staffa, in Scotland, where the rocks have been thrown
into such a position as to justify the name of Fingal's Cave, which
they bear, and which was bestowed on them in the olden times before
Scottish history began to be written. It is singular how many of the
names which dignify, or designate, favorite spots of the Giant's
Causeway have been duplicated in the Palisades. Among the Hudson rocks
are several 'Lady's Chairs,' 'Lover's Leaps,' 'Devil's Toothpicks,'
'Devil's Pulpits,' and, in many spots on the water's edge, especially
those most openly exposed to the weather, we see exactly the same
conformations which excite admiration and wonder in the Irish rocks."

       * * *

  Where the mighty cliffs look upward in their glory and their glow
  I see a wondrous river in its beauty southward flow.

  _Thomas C. Harbaugh._

       * * *

Under the base of these cliffs William Cullen Bryant one Sabbath
morning wrote his beautiful lines:

  "Cool shades and dews are round my way,
  And silence of the early day;
  Mid the dark rocks that watch his bed,
  Glitters the mighty Hudson spread,
  Unrippled, save by drops that fall
  From shrubs that fringe his mountain wall;
  And o'er the clear, still water swells
  The music of the Sabbath bells.

  All, save this little nook of land,
  Circled with trees, on which I stand;
  All, save that line of hills which lie
  Suspended in the mimic sky--
  Seems a blue void, above, below,
  Through which the white clouds come and go;
  And from the green world's farthest steep
  I gaze into the airy deep."

       * * *

    A mellow sunset was settling upon the hills and
    waters and a thousand flashes played over the distant
    city as its spires and prominent objects caught its glow.

    _N. P. Willis._

       * * *

There are many strange stories connected with the Palisades, and
one narrator says: "remarkable disappearances have occurred in the
vicinity that have never been explained. On a conical-shaped rock near
Clinton Point a young man and a young woman were seen standing some
half a century ago. Several of their friends, who were back some
thirty feet from the face of the cliff, saw them distinctly, and
called out to them not to approach too near the edge. The young couple
laughingly sent some answer back, and a moment later vanished as by
magic. Their friends rushed to the edge of the cliff but saw no trace
of them. They noticed at once that the tide was out, and at the base
three or four boatmen were sauntering about as though nothing had
happened (forgetting even, as Bryant did, that a vertical line from
the top of the cliff on account of the crumbling debris of ages makes
it impossible for even the strongest arm to hurl a stone from the
summit to the margin of the river). A diligent search was instituted.
Friends and boatmen joined in the search, but from that day to this
they have never been heard from, no trace of them has been found, and
the mystery of their disappearance is as complete now as it was five
minutes after they vanished--a more tragical termination than the
story of the old pilot on a Lake George steamer, who, surrounded one
morning by a group of tourist-questioners, pointed to Roger Slide
Mountain, and said: "A couple went up there and never came back
again." "What do you suppose, captain," said a fair-haired, anxious
listener, "ever became of them?" "Can't tell," said the captain, "some
folks said they went down on the other side.""

The old Palisade Mountain House, a few miles above Fort Lee, had
a commanding location, but was burned in 1884 and never rebuilt.
Pleasant villas are here and there springing up along this rocky
balcony of the lower Hudson, and probably the entire summit will some
day abound in castles and luxuriant homes. It is in fact within the
limit of possibility that this may in the future present the finest
residential street in the world, with a natural macadamized boulevard
midway between the Hudson and the sky.

       * * *

  What love yon cliffs and steeps could tell
  If vocal made by Fancy's spell!

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

It grieves one to see the gray rocks torn away for building material,
but, as fast as man destroys, nature kindly heals the wound; or to
keep the Palisade figure more complete, she recaptures the scarred and
broken battlements, unfolding along the steep escarpment her waving
standards of green. It sometimes seems as if one can almost see her
selecting the easiest point of attack, marshalling her forces, running
her parallels with Boadicea-like skill, and carrying her streaming
banners, more real than Macbeth's "Birnam-Wood" to crowning rampart
and lofty parapet.

The New York side from the Battery to Inwood, the northern end of
Manhattan Island, is already "well peopled." Until recently the land
about Fort Washington has been held in considerable tracts and
the very names of these suburban points suggest altitude and
outlook--Highbridgeville, Fordham Heights, Morris Heights, University
Heights, Kingsbridge Heights, Mount Hope, &c. The growth of the city
all the way to Jerome and Van Cortlandt's Park during the last few
years has been marvelous. It has literally stepped over the Harlem to
find room in the picturesque county of Westchester.

=The Island of Manhattan.=--As we approach the northern limit of
Manhattan we feel that in the preservation of the beautiful name
"Manhattan," distinctive of New York's chief borough, Irving's dream
has been happily realized. The meaning of this Indian word has been
the subject of much discussion. It is, however, simply the name of a
tribe. As the old historian De Laet says, "On the east side, on the
main land dwell the Manhattoes," and again from the "Documentary
History of New York." "It is so called from the people which inhabited
the main land on the east side of the river."

       * * *

  Pleasant it is to lie amid the grass,
    Under these shady locusts half the day,
    Watching the ships reflected in the Bay,
  Topmast and shroud, as in a wizard's glass.

  _Thomas Bailey Aldrich._

       * * *

[Illustration: INDIAN HEAD, PALISADES]

The word Manhattan signifies also it is said: "The People of the
Islands," and it was evidently used by the Indians as a generic term
designating the inhabitants of the island itself, and also of Long
Island and the Neversink. This is in accordance with the testimony of
Van der Donck. With Irving we all recognize the music and poetry
of the name and are proud that our river of beauty is so happily
heralded.

=Spuyten Duyvil Creek.=--Above Washington Heights, on the east bank,
the _Spuyten Duyvil_ meets the Hudson. This stream is the northern
boundary of New York Island, and a short distance east of the Hudson
bears the name of Harlem River. Its course is southeast and joins the
East River at Randall's Island, just above Hell Gate. It is a curious
fact that this modest stream should be bounded by such suggestive
appellations as Hell Gate and Spuyten Duyvil. This is the first point
of special legendary interest to one journeying up the Hudson and it
takes its name according to the veracious Knickerbocker, from the
following incident: It seems that the famous Antony Van Corlear was
despatched one evening with an important message up the Hudson. When
he arrived at this creek the wind was high, the elements were in an
uproar, and no boatman at hand. "For a short time," it is said, "he
vapored like an impatient ghost upon the brink, and then, bethinking
himself of the urgency of his errand, took a hearty embrace of his
stone bottle, swore most valorously that he would swim across _en
spijt en Duyvil_ (in spite of the Devil), and daringly plunged into
the stream. Scarce had he buffeted half way over when he was observed
to struggle violently, as if battling with the spirit of the waters.
Instinctively he put his trumpet to his mouth, and giving a vehement
blast--sank forever to the bottom."

       * * *

  O legends full of life and health,
    That live when records fail and die,
  Ye are the Hudson's richest wealth,
    The frondage of her history!

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

The main branch of the Hudson River Railroad, with its station at
Forty-second Street and Fourth Avenue, crosses the Harlem River at
Mott Haven, and, following its northern bank, meets the Hudson at this
point, where the 30th Street branch, following the river, joins the
main line. The steamer now passes Riverdale, with its beautiful
residences and the Convent of Mount St. Vincent, one of the prominent
landmarks of the Hudson, located on grounds bought of Edwin Forrest,
the tragedian, whose "Font Hill Castle" appears in the foreground, and
we come to

=Yonkers=, on the east bank, seventeen miles from New York, at the
mouth of the Nepperhan. West of the creek is a large rock, called
A-mac-lea-sin, the great stone to which the Indians paid reverence as
an evidence of the permanency and immutability of their deity. The
Mahican Village at the mouth of the creek was called Nappechemak.
European settlements were made as early as 1639, as shown by deeds of
purchase. Here are many important manufacturing industries: carpet,
silk, and hat factories; mowers and reapers, gutta percha, rubber and
pencil companies. Its "Recreation Pavilion" on the pier was a noble
thing for the city to build--costing $50,000. The structure is of
steel and capable of accommodating 5,000 people.

It is said that Yonkers derived its name from Yonk-herr--the young
heir, or young sir, of the Phillipse manor. Until after the middle
of the seventeenth century the Phillipse family had their principal
residence at Castle Phillipse, Sleepy Hollow, but having purchased
"property to the southward" from Adrian Van der Donck and obtained
from the English king a patent creating the manor of Phillipsburgh,
they moved from their old castle to the new "Manor Hall," which at
this time was probably the finest mansion on the Hudson. This property
was confiscated by act of Legislature in 1779, as Frederick Phillipse,
third lord of the manor, was thought to lean toward royalty, and
sold by the "Commissioners of Forfeiture" in 1785. It was afterwards
purchased by John Jacob Astor, then passed to the Government, was
bought by the village of Yonkers in 1868, and became the City Hall in
1872. The older portion of the house was built in 1682, the present
front in 1745. The woodwork is very interesting, also the ceilings,
the large hall and the wide fire-place. In the room still pointed out
as Washington's, the fire-place retains the old tiles, "illustrating
familiar passages in Bible history," fifty on each side, looking as
clear as if they were made but yesterday.

       * * *

  Once more I walk in the dark old street
    Wearily to and fro:--
  But I sit no more on the desolate pier
    Watching the river flow.

  _Richard Henry Stoddard._

       * * *

Mary Phillipse, belle of the neighborhood, and known in tradition as
Washington's first love, was born in the "Manor House" July 3, 1730.
Washington first met her on a visit to New York in 1756, after his
return from Braddock's campaign, as guest of Beverly Robinson, who had
married her elder sister.

It has been claimed by some writers that he proposed and was rejected,
but it is doubtful whether he ever was serious in his attentions.
At least there is no evidence that he ever "told his love," and she
finally married Col. Roger Morris, one of Washington's associates on
Braddock's staff. The best part of residential Yonkers lies to the
northward, beautifully embowered in trees as seen from the Hudson. A
line of electric street cars run north along Warburton Avenue. The
street known as Broadway, is a continuation of Broadway, New York.
Many of the river towns still keep this name, probably prophetic as a
part of the great Broadway which may extend some day from the Battery
to Peekskill.

Almost opposite Yonkers a ravine or sort of step-ladder cleft, now
known as Alpine Gorge, reaches up the precipitous sides of the
Palisades. The landing here was formerly called Closter's, from which
a road zigzags to the top of the cliff and thence to Closter Village.
Here Lord Grey disembarked in October, 1778, and crossed to Hackensack
Valley, "surprising and massacring Col. Bayler's patriots, despite
their surrender and calls for mercy."

Indian Head (510 feet) about two miles north of Alpine Gorge, is the
highest point of the Palisades.

       * * *

  Eve o'er our path is stealing fast;
  Yon quivering splendors are the last;
  His latest glories fringe the height
  Behind us with their golden light.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

=Yonkers to West Point=

Passing Glenwood, now a suburban station of Yonkers, conspicuous from
the Colgate mansion near the river bank, built by a descendant of
the English Colgates who were familiar friends of William Pitt, and
leaders of the Liberal Club in Kent, England, and "Greystone," once
the country residence of the late Samuel J. Tilden, Governor of New
York, and presidential candidate in 1876, we come to

=Hastings=, where a party of Hessians during the Revolutionary
struggle were surprised and cut to pieces by troops under Colonel
Sheldon. It was here also that Lord Cornwallis embarked for Fort Lee
after the capture of Fort Washington, and here in 1850 Garibaldi,
the liberator of Italy, whose centennial was observed July 4, 1907,
frequently came to spend the Sabbath and visit friends when he was
living at Staten Island. Although there is apparently little to
interest in the village, there are many beautiful residences in the
immediate neighborhood, and the Old Post road for two miles to the
northward furnishes a beautiful walk or driveway, well shaded by old
locust trees. The tract of country from Spuyten Duyvil to Hastings was
called by the Indians Kekesick and reached east as far as the Bronx
River.

=Dobbs Ferry= is now at hand, named after an old Swedish ferryman. The
village has not only a delightful location but it is also beautiful in
itself. In 1781 it was Washington's headquarters, and the old house,
still standing, is famous as the spot where General Washington and the
Count de Rochambeau planned the campaign against Yorktown; where the
evacuation of New York was arranged by General Clinton and Sir Guy
Carleton the British commander, and where the first salute to the flag
of the United States was fired by a British man-of-war. A deep glen,
known as Paramus, opposite Dobbs Ferry, leads to Tappan and New
Jersey. Cornwallis landed here in 1776. It is now known as Snedden's
Landing.

       * * *

    A lovely country for a summer encampment, breezy
    hills commanding wide prospects, shady valleys watered
    by bright pastoral streams, the Bronx, the Spraine and
    the Neperan.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

At Dobbs Ferry, June 14, 1894, the base-stone of a memorial shaft was
laid with imposing ceremony by the New York State Society of the Sons
of the American Revolution, which erected the monument. There were one
thousand Grand Army veterans in line, and addresses by distinguished
orators and visitors. The Society and its guests, including members
of the cabinet, officers of the army and navy, and prominent men of
various States, accompanied by full Marine Band of the navy yard, with
a detachment of Naval Reserves, participated in the event.

Voyagers up the river that day saw the "Miantonomoh" and the
"Lancaster," under the command of Rear-Admiral Gherardi, anchored
mid-stream to take part in the exercises. During the Revolution this
historic house was leased by a Dutch farmer holding under Frederick
Phillipse as landlord. After the war it was purchased by Peter
Livingston and known since as the Livingston House. Arnold and Andre
were to have met here but providentially for the American cause, the
meeting took place at Haverstraw.

The Indian name of Dobbs Ferry was Wecquaskeck, and it is said by
Ruttenber that the outlines of the old Indian village can still be
traced by numerous shell-beds. It was located at the mouth of Wicker's
Creek which was called by the Indians Wysquaqua.

=Tappan Zee.=--The steamer is now entering Irving's rich domain, and
Tappan Zee lapping the threshold of "Sunnyside," seems almost a part
of his very dooryard. The river, which has averaged about a mile in
breadth, begins to gradually widen at Hastings, and almost seems like
a gentle, reposeful lake.

=Piermont=, whose "mile-long-pier," built many years ago by the Erie
Railroad, hardly mars the landscape so great is the majesty of the
river, is seen on the west bank with Tower Hill rising above it from
which four states are seen. The view includes Long Island, the Sound
and the Orange Mountains on the south, with the Catskills to the north
and Berkshires to the northeast. Louis Gaylord Clark, a friend of
Irving, and an early literary associate had a cottage on Piermont
Hills.

       * * *

    We have a charming position for our French encampment
    along the Hudson among rocks and under magnificent tulip trees.

    _Count Dumas._

       * * *

Turning to the eastern shore, we see "Nuits," the Cottinet residence,
Italian in style, built of Caen stone, "Nevis," home of the late Col.
James Hamilton, son of Alexander Hamilton, the George L. Schuyler
mansion, the late Cyrus W. Field's, and many pleasant places about
Abbotsford, and come to

=Irvington=, on the east bank, 24 miles from New York, once known as
Dearman's, but changed in compliment to the great writer and lover of
the Hudson, who after a long sojourn in foreign lands, returned to
live by the tranquil waters of Tappan Zee. In a letter to his brother
he refers to Sleepy Hollow as the favorite resort of his boyhood, and
says: "The Hudson is in a manner my first and last love, and after
all my wanderings and seeming infidelities, I return to it with
a heartfelt preference over all the rivers of the world." As at
Stratford-on-Avon every flower is redolent of Shakespeare, and at
Melrose every stone speaks of Walter Scott, so here on every breeze
floats the spirit of Washington Irving. A short walk of half a mile
north from the station brings us to his much-loved

="Sunnyside."= Irving aptly describes it in one of his stories as
"made up of gable-ends, and full of angles and corners as an old
cocked hat. It is said, in fact, to have been modeled after the hat of
Peter the Headstrong, as the Escurial of Spain was fashioned after the
gridiron of the blessed St. Lawrence." Wolfert's Roost, as it was once
styled (Roost signifying Rest), took its name from Wolfert Acker, a
former owner. It consisted originally of ten acres when purchased by
Irving in 1835, but eight acres were afterwards added. With great
humor Irving put above the porch entrance "George Harvey, Boum'r,"
Boumeister being an old Dutch word for architect. A storm-worn
weather-cock, "which once battled with the wind on the top of the
Stadt House of New Amsterdam in the time of Peter Stuyvesant, erects
his crest on the gable, and a gilded horse in full gallop, once the
weather-cock of the great Van der Heyden palace of Albany, glitters in
the sunshine, veering with every breeze, on the peaked turret over the
portal."

       * * *

    Irving chose his residence in the valley, not amid
    the mountains; by the fields and meadows of the broad
    Tappan Zee, rather than the Highlands; in a congenial
    region suited to his temperament.

    _Dr. Bethune._

       * * *

About fifty years ago a cutting of Walter Scott's favorite ivy at
Melrose Abbey was transported across the Atlantic, and trained over
the porch of "Sunnyside," by the hand of Mrs. Renwick, daughter of
Rev. Andrew Jeffrey of Lochmaben, known in girlhood as the "Bonnie
Jessie" of Annandale, or the "Blue-eyed Lassie" of Robert Burns:--a
graceful tribute, from the shrine of Waverley to the nest of
Knickerbocker:

  A token of friendship immortal
    With Washington Irving returns:--
  Scott's ivy entwined o'er his portal
    By the Blue-eyed Lassie of Burns.

Scott's cordial greeting at Abbotsford, and his persistence in getting
Murray to reconsider the publication of the "Sketch Book," which he
had previously declined, were never forgotten by Irving. It was during
a critical period of his literary career, and the kindness of the
Great Magician, in directing early attention to his genius, is still
cherished by every reader of the "Sketch Book" from Manhattan to
San Francisco. The hearty grasp of the Minstrel at the gateway of
Abbotsford was in reality a warm handshake to a wider brotherhood
beyond the sea.

       * * *

  In purple tints woven together
    The Hudson shakes hands with the Tweed,
  Commingling with Abbotsford's heather
    The clover of Sunnyside's mead.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Washington Irving.=--While he was building "Sunnyside," a letter came
from Daniel Webster, then Secretary of State, appointing him minister
to Spain. It was unexpected and unsolicited, and Webster remarked that
day to a friend: "Washington Irving to-day will be the most surprised
man in America." Irving had already shown diplomatic ability in London
in promoting the settlement of the "North Western Boundary," and his
appointment was received with universal favor. Then as now Sunnyside
was already a Mecca for travelers, and, among many well-known to fame,
was a young man, afterwards Napoleon the Third. Referring to his
visit, Irving wrote in 1853: "Napoleon and Eugenie, Emperor and
Empress! The one I have had as a guest at my cottage, the other I have
held as a pet child upon my knee in Granada. The last I saw of Eugenie
Montijo, she was one of the reigning belles of Madrid; now, she is
upon the throne, launched from a returnless shore, upon a dangerous
sea, infamous for its tremendous shipwrecks. Am I to live to see the
catastrophe of her career, and the end of this suddenly conjured up
empire, which seems to be of such stuff as dreams are made of?
I confess my personal acquaintance with the individuals in this
historical romance gives me uncommon interest in it; but I consider
it stamped with danger and instability, and as liable to extravagant
vicissitudes as one of Dumas' novels." A wonderful prophecy completely
fulfilled in the short space of seventeen years.

       * * *

    How many such men as Washington Irving are there
    in America. God don't send many such spirits into this
    world.

    _Lord Byron._

       * * *

The aggregate sale of Irving's works when he received his portfolio
to Spain was already more than half a million copies, with an equal
popularity achieved in Britain. No writer was ever more truly loved
on both sides of the Atlantic, and his name is cherished to-day in
England as fondly as it is in our own country. It has been the good
fortune of the writer to spend many a delightful day in the very
centre of Merrie England, in the quiet town of Stratford-on-Avon,
and feel the gentle companionship of Irving. Of all writers who have
brought to Stratford their heart homage Irving stands the acknowledged
chief. The sitting-room in the "Red Horse Hotel," where he was
disturbed in his midnight reverie, is still called Irving's room, and
the walls are hung with portraits taken at different periods of his
life. Mine host said that visitors from every land were as much
interested in this room as in Shakespeare's birth-place. The remark
may have been intensified to flatter an American visitor, but there
are few names dearer to the Anglo-Saxon race than that on the plain
headstone in the burial-yard of Sleepy Hollow. Sunnyside is scarcely
visible to the Day Line tourist. A little gleam of color here
and there amid the trees, close to the river bank, near a small
boat-house, merely indicates its location; and the traveler by train
has only a hurried glimpse, as it is within one hundred feet of the
New York Central Railroad. Tappan Zee, at this point, is a little more
than two miles wide and over the beautiful expanse Irving has thrown
a wondrous charm. There is, in fact, "magic in the web" of all his
works. A few modern critics, lacking appreciation alike for humor and
genius, may regard his essays as a thing of the past, but as long as
the Mahicanituk, the ever-flowing Hudson, pours its waters to the
sea, as long as Rip Van Winkle sleeps in the blue Catskills, or the
"Headless Horseman" rides at midnight along the Old Post Road _en
route_ for Teller's Point, so long will the writings of Washington
Irving be remembered and cherished. We somehow feel the reality of
every legend he has given us. The spring bubbling up near his cottage
was brought over, as he gravely tells us, in a churn from Holland by
one of the old time settlers, and we are half inclined to believe it;
and no one ever thinks of doubting that the "Flying Dutchman," Mynheer
Van Dam, has been rowing for two hundred years and never made a port.
It is in fact still said by the old inhabitants, that often in the
soft twilight of summer evenings, when the sea is like glass and the
opposite hills throw their shadows across it, that the low vigorous
pull of oars is heard but no boat is seen.

[Illustration: NORTHERN POINT OF PALISADES]

       * * *

    Here was no castle in the air, but a realized day-dream.
    Irving was there, as genial, humorous and imaginative
    as if he had never wandered from the primal
    haunts of his childhood and his fame.

    _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

According to Irving "Sunnyside" was once the property of old Baltus
Van Tassel, and here lived the fair Katrina, beloved by all the youths
of the neighborhood, but more especially by Ichabod Crane, the country
school-master, and a reckless youth by the name of Van Brunt. Irving
tells us that he thought out the story one morning on London Bridge,
and went home and completed it in thirty-six hours. The character of
Ichabod Crane was a sketch of a young man whom he met at Kinderhook
when writing his Knickerbocker history. It will be remembered that
Ichabod Crane went to a quilting-bee at the home of Mynheer Van
Tassel, and, after the repast, was regaled with various ghost stories
peculiar to the locality. When the "party" was over he lingered for
a time with the fair Katrina, but sallied out soon after with an air
quite desolate and chop-fallen. The night grew darker and darker. He
had never before felt so lonesome and miserable. As he passed the
fatal tree where Arnold was captured, there started up before him the
identical "Headless Horseman" to whom he had been introduced by the
story of Brom Bones. Nay, not entirely headless; for the head which
"should have rested upon his shoulders was carried before him on the
pommel of the saddle. His terror rose to desperation. He rode for
death and life. The strange horseman sped beside him at an equal pace.
He fell into a walk. The strange horseman did the same. He endeavored
to sing a psalm-tune, but his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth.
If he could but reach the bridge Ichabod thought he would be safe.
Away then he flew in rapid flight. He reached the bridge, he thundered
over the resounding planks. Then he saw the goblin rising in his
stirrups, and in the very act of launching his head at him. It
encountered his cranium with a tremendous crash. He was tumbled
headlong into the dirt, and the black steed and the spectral rider
passed by like a whirlwind. The next day tracks of horses deeply
dented in the road were traced to the bridge, beyond which, on the
bank of a broad part of the brook, where the water ran deep and black,
was found the hat of the unfortunate Ichabod, and close beside it a
shattered pumpkin." All honor to him who fills this working-day world
with humor, romance and beauty!

       * * *

    I beg you will have the kindness to let me know when
    Mr. Irving takes pen in hand again; for assuredly I
    shall expect a very great treat which I may chance never
    to hear of but through your kindness.

    _Walter Scott._

       * * *

    I want to visit Washington Irving, I want to see your
    stupendous scenery, I want to go to the grave of
    Washington.

    _Lord Byron._

       * * *

=Lyndehurst=, Helen M. Gould's residence. A short distance north of
"Sunnyside" is the home of Helen M. Gould, whose modest and liberal
use of wealth in noble charities has endeared her to every American
heart. The place was first known as the Paulding Manor House, where
William Paulding, early mayor of New York, and nephew of one of the
captors of Andre had his country home. It is a beautiful specimen of
old time English architecture, with a suggestion, as some writers have
noted, of Newstead Abbey. This part of the Hudson is particularly rich
in beautiful residences, rising tier upon tier from the river to the
horizon. Albert Bierstadt, the artist, had here a beautiful home,
unfortunately burned many years ago.

=The Old Post Road= from New York to Albany is in many particulars the
richest and greatest highway of our country.

=Tappan.=--Almost opposite Irvington about two miles southwest of
Piermont, is old Tappantown, where Major Andre was executed October
2, 1780. The removal of his body from Tappan to Westminster was by a
special British ship, and a singular incident was connected with it.
The roots of a cypress tree were found entwined about his skull and a
scion from the tree was carried to England and planted in the garden
adjoining Windsor Palace. It is a still more curious fact that the
tree beneath which Andre was captured was struck by lightning on the
day of Benedict Arnold's death in London. Further reference will be
made to Andre in our description of Tarrytown, and also of Haverstraw,
where Arnold and Andre met at the house of Joshua Hett Smith.

=Tarrytown=, 26 miles from New York. It was here on the Old Post Road,
now called Broadway, a little north of the village, that Andre was
captured and Arnold's treachery exposed. A monument erected on the
spot by the people of Westchester County, October 7, 1853, bears the
inscription:

ON THIS SPOT, THE 23D DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1780, THE SPY,
                   MAJOR JOHN ANDRE,
  Adjutant-General of the British Army, was captured by
   JOHN PAULDING, DAVID WILLIAMS, AND ISAAC VAN WART.
               ALL NATIVES OF THIS COUNTY.
               History has told the rest.

The following quaint ballad-verses on the young hero give a realistic
touch to one of the most providential occurrences in our history:

  He with a scouting party
    Went down to Tarrytown,
  Where he met a British officer,
    A man of high renown,
  Who says unto these gentlemen,
    "You're of the British cheer,
  I trust that you can tell me
    If there's any danger near?"

  Then up stept this young hero,
    John Paulding was his name,
  "Sir, tell us where you're going
    And also whence you came?"
  "I bear the British flag, sir;
    I've a pass to go this way,
  I'm on an expedition,
    And have no time to stay."

Young Paulding, however, thought that he had plenty of time to linger
until he examined his boots, wherein he found the papers, and, when
offered ten guineas by Andre, if he would allow him to pursue his
journey, replied: "If it were ten thousand guineas you could not stir
one step."

The centennial anniversary of the event was commemorated in 1880 by
placing, through the generosity of John Anderson, on the original
obelisk of 1853, a large statue representing John Paulding as a minute
man.

       * * *

    That overruling Providence which has so often and so
    remarkably interposed in our favor, never manifested
    itself more conspicuously than in the timely discovery
    of Arnold's treachery.

    _George Washington._

       * * *

Tarrytown was the very heart of the debatable ground of the Revolution
and many striking incidents mark its early history. In 1777 Vaughan's
troops landed here on their way to attack Fort Montgomery, and here a
party of Americans, under Major Hunt, surprised a number of British
refugees while playing cards at the Van Tassel tavern. The major
completely "turned the cards" upon them by rushing in with brandished
stick, which he brought down with emphasis upon the table, remarking
with genuine American brevity, "Gentlemen, clubs are trumps." Here,
too, according to Irving, arose the two great orders of chivalry, the
"Cow Boys" and "Skinners." The former fought, or rather marauded under
the American, the latter under the British banner; the former were
known as "Highlanders," the latter as the "Lower-Party." In the zeal
of service both were apt to make blunders, and confound the property
of friend and foe. "Neither of them, in the heat and hurry of a foray,
had time to ascertain the politics of a horse or cow which they were
driving off into captivity, nor when they wrung the neck of a rooster
did they trouble their heads whether he crowed for Congress or King
George."

It was also a genial, reposeful country for the faithful historian,
Diedrich Knickerbocker; and here he picked up many of those legends
which were given by him to the world. One of these was the legend
connected with the old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow. "A drowsy,
dreamy influence seems to hang over the land, and to pervade the very
atmosphere. Some say the place was bewitched by a high German doctor
during the early days of the settlement; others that an old Indian
chief, the wizard of his tribe, held his pow-wows there before
Hendrick Hudson's discovery of the river. The dominant spirit,
however, that haunts this enchanted region, is the apparition of
a figure on horse-back, without a head, said to be the ghost of a
Hessian trooper, and was known at all the country firesides as the
'Headless horseman' of Sleepy Hollow."

       * * *

  O waters of Pocantico!
    Wild rivulet of wood and glen!
  May thy glad laughter, sweet and low,
    Long, long outlive the sighs of men.

  _S. H. Thayer._

       * * *

[Illustration: SLEEPY HOLLOW CHURCH.]

=Sleepy Hollow.=--The Old Dutch Church, the oldest on the Hudson, is
about one-half mile north from Tarrytown.

It was built by "Frederick Filipse and his wife Katrina Van Cortland
in 1690." The material is partly of stone and partly of brick brought
from Holland. It stands as an appropriate sentinel near the entrance
to the burial-yard where Irving sleeps. After entering the gate our
way leads past the graves of the Ackers, the Van Tassels, and the Van
Warts, with inscriptions and plump Dutch cherubs on every side
that often delighted the heart of Diedrich Knickerbocker. How many
worshippers since that November day in 1859, have come hither with
reverent footsteps to read on the plain slab this simple inscription:
"Washington Irving, born April 3, 1783. Died November 28, 1859," and
recall Longfellow's beautiful lines:

  "Here lies the gentle humorist, who died
    In the bright Indian Summer of his fame.
    A simple stone, with but a date and name,
  Marks his secluded resting place beside
  The river that he loved and glorified.
    Here in the Autumn of his days he came,
    But the dry leaves of life were all aflame
  With tints that brightened and were multiplied.
  How sweet a life was his, how sweet a death;
  Living to wing with mirth the weary hours,
    Or with romantic tales the heart to cheer;
  Dying to leave a memory like the breath
  Of Summers full of sunshine and of showers,
    A grief and gladness in the atmosphere."

       * * *

    If ever I should wish for a retreat whither I might
    steal from the world and its distractions, and dream
    quietly away the remnant of a troubled life, I know of
    none more promising than this little valley.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

Sleepy Hollow Church, like Sunnyside, is hidden away from the steamer
tourist by summer foliage. Just before reaching Kingston Point
light-house, a view, looking northeast up the little bay to the right,
will sometimes give the outline of the building. Beyond this a tall
granite shaft, erected by the Delavan family, is generally quite
distinctly seen, and this is near the grave of Irving. A light-house,
built in 1883, marks the point where the Pocantico or Sleepy Hollow
Creek joins the Hudson:

  Pocantico's hushed waters glide
    Through Sleepy Hollow's haunted ground,
  And whisper to the listening tide
    The name carved o'er one lowly mound.

To one loving our early history and legends there is no spot more
central or delightful than Tarrytown. Irving humorously says that
Tarrytown took its name from husbands tarrying too late at the village
tavern, but its real derivation is Tarwen-Dorp, or Wheat-town. The
name of the old Indian village at this point was Alipconck (the place
of elms). It has often occurred to the writer that, more than any
other river, the Hudson has a distinct personality, and also that
the four main divisions of human life are particularly marked in the
Adirondacks, the Catskills, the Highlands and Tappan Bay:

  The Adirondacks, childhood's glee;
    The Catskills, youth with dreams o'ercast;
  The Highlands, manhood bold and free;
    The Tappan Zee, age come at last.

This was the spot that Irving loved; we linger by his grave at
Sleepy Hollow with devotion; we sit upon his porch at Sunnyside with
reverence:

  Thrice blest and happy Tappan Zee,
    Whose banks along thy glistening tide
  Have legend, truth, and poetry
    Sweetly expressed in Sunnyside!


       * * *

   Whose golden fancy wove a spell
    As lasting as the scene is fair
  And made the mountain stream and dell
    His own dream-life forever share.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

=Nyack=, on the west side, 27 miles from New York. The village,
including Upper Nyack, West Nyack and South Nyack, has many fine
suburban homes and lies in a semi-circle of hills which sweep back
from Piermont, meeting the river again at the northern end of Tappan
Zee. Tappan is derived from an Indian tribe of that name, which, being
translated, is said to signify cold water. The bay is ten miles in
length, with an average breadth of about two miles and a half.

Nyack grows steadily in favor as a place for summer residents. The
hotels, boarding-houses and suburban homes would increase the census
as given to nearly ten thousand people. The _West Shore Railroad_ is
two and a half miles from the Hudson, with (a) station at West Nyack. The
_Northern Railroad of New Jersey_, leased by the _New York, Lake Erie
and Western_ (Chambers Street and 23d Street, New York), passes west
of the Bergen Hills and the Palisades. The Ramapo Mountains, north
of Nyack, were formerly known by ancient mariners as the Hook, or
Point-no-Point. They come down to the river in little headlands, the
points of which disappear as the steamer nears them. (The peak to the
south, known as Hook Mountain, is 730 feet high.) Ball Mountain above
this, and nearer the river, 650 feet. They were sometimes called by
Dutch captains Verditege Hook.

       * * *

  The sails hung idly all night long,
    I dreamed a dream of you and me;
  'Twas sweeter than the sweetest song,--
    The dream I dreamed on Tappan Zee.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

[Illustration: STONY POINT]

Perhaps it took so long to pass these illusive headlands, reaching as
they do eight miles along the western bank, that it naturally seemed a
_very tedious_ point to the old skippers. Midway in this Ramapo Range,
"set in a dimple of the hills," is--

=Rockland Lake=, source of the Hackensack River, one hundred and fifty
feet above the Hudson. The "slide way," by which the ice is sent down
to the boats to be loaded, can be seen from the steamer, and the
blocks in motion, as seen by the traveler, resemble little white pigs
running down an inclined plane. As we look at the great ice-houses
to-day, which, like uncouth barns, stand here and there along the
Hudson, it does not seem possible that only a few years ago ice was
decidedly unpopular, and wheeled about New York in a hand-cart. Think
of one hand-cart supplying New York with ice! It was considered
unhealthy, and called forth many learned discussions.

Returning to the east bank, we see above Tarrytown many superb
residences, notably "Rockwood," the home of William Rockefeller, of
the Standard Oil Company. The estate of General James Watson Webb is
also near at hand. Passing Scarborough Landing, with the Hook Mountain
and Ball Mountains on the left, we see

=Ossining=, formerly known as Sing Sing, on east bank. The low
buildings, near the river bank, are the State's Prison. They are
constructed of marble, but are not considered palatial by the
prisoners that occupy the cells. It was quarried near by, and the
prisons were built by convicts imported from Auburn in 1826. Saddlery,
furniture, shoes, etc., are manufactured within its walls. There was
an Indian chieftancy here known as the Sintsinks. In a deed to Philip
Phillipse in 1685 a stream is referred to as "Kitchewan called by the
Indians Sink-Sink." The Indian Village was known as Ossining, from
"ossin" a stone and "ing" a place, probably so called from the rocky
and stony character of the river banks.

       * * *

  How many, at this hour, along thy course,
  Slumber to thine eternal murmurings
  That mingle with the utterance of their dreams.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

The heights above Tappan Zee at this point are crowned by fine
residences, and the village is one of the pleasantest on the river.
The drives among the hills are delightful and present a wide and
charming outlook. Here also are several flourishing military boarding
schools and a seminary for girls. The old silver and copper mines once
worked here never yielded satisfactory returns for invested capital.
Various industries give active life and prosperity to the town. Just
above Sing Sing

=Croton River=, known by the Indians as Kitchawonk, joins the
Hudson in a bay crossed by the _New York Central Railroad_ Croton
draw-bridge. East of this point is a water shed having an area of 350
square miles, which supplies New York with water. The Croton Reservoir
is easily reached by a pleasant carriage drive from Sing Sing, and it
is a singular fact that the pitcher and ice-cooler of New York, or in
other words, Croton Dam and Rockland Lake, should be almost opposite.
About fifty years ago the Croton first made its appearance in New
York, brought in by an aqueduct of solid masonry which follows the
course of the Hudson near the Old Post Road, or at an average distance
of about a mile from the east bank. Here and there its course can be
traced by "white stone ventilating towers" from Sing Sing to High
Bridge, which conveys the aqueduct across the Harlem River. Its
capacity is 100,000,000 gallons per day, which however began to be
inadequate for the city and a new aqueduct was therefore begun in 1884
and completed in 1890, capable of carrying three times that amount, at
a cost of $25,000,000. The water-shed is well supplied with streams
and lakes. Lake Mahopac, one of its fountains, is one of the most
beautiful sheets of water near the metropolis, and easily accessible
by a pleasant drive from Peekskill, or by the _Harlem Railroad_ from
New York. The old Indian name was Ma-cook-pake, signifying a large
inland lake, or perhaps an island near the shore. The same derivation
is also seen in Copake Lake, Columbia County. On an island of Mahopac
the last great "convention" of the southern tribes of the Hudson was
held. The lake is about 800 feet above tide, and it is pleasant to
know that the bright waters of Mahopac and the clear streams of Putnam
and Westchester are conveyed to New York even as the poetic waters of
Loch Katrine to the city of Glasgow. The Catskill water supply, the
ground of which was broken in 1907, is referred to in our description
of Cold Spring and the Catskills.

       * * *

  Round the aqueducts of story
    As the mists of Lethe throng
  Croton's waves in all their glory
    Troop in melody along.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *

Just above Croton Bay and the _New York Central Railroad_ draw-bridge
will be seen the old Van Cortlandt Manor, where Frederick Phillipse
and Katrina Van Cortlandt were married, as seen by the inscription on
the old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow.

=Teller's Point= (sometimes known as Croton or Underhill's Point),
separates Tappan Zee from Haverstraw Bay. It was called by the Indians
"Senasqua." Tradition says that ancient warriors still haunt the
surrounding glens and woods, and the sachems of Teller's Point are
household words in the neighborhood. It is also said that there was
once a great Indian battle here, and perhaps the ghosts of the old
warriors are attracted by the Underhill grapery and the 10,000 gallons
of wine bottled every season.

It was here the British warship "The Vulture," came with Andre and put
him ashore at the foot of Mount Tor below Haverstraw.

The river now opens into a beautiful bay, four miles in width,--a bed
large enough to tuck up fifteen River Rhines side by side. This reach
sometimes seems in the bright sunlight like a molten bay of silver,
and the tourist finds relief in adjusting his smoked glasses to temper
the dazzling light.

       * * *

  Beneath these gold and azure skies
    The river winds through leafy glades,
  Save where, like battlements, arise
    The gray and tufted Palisades.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

=Haverstraw=, 37 miles from New York. Haverstraw Bay is sometimes said
to be five miles wide. Its widest point, however, from Croton Landing
to Haverstraw, is, according to United States Geological Survey,
a little over four miles. The principal industry of Haverstraw is
brick-making, and its brick yards reaching north to Grassy Point, are
of materal profit, if not picturesque. The place was called Haverstraw
by the Dutch, perhaps as a place of rye straw, to distinguish it from
Tarrytown, a place of wheat. The Indian name has been lost; but, if
its original derivation is uncertain, it at least calls up the rhyme
of old-time river captains, which Captain Anderson of the "Mary
Powell" told the writer he used to hear frequently when a boy:

  "West Point and Middletown,
  Konnosook and Doodletown,
  Kakiak and Mamapaw,
  Stony Point and Haverstraw."

Quaint as these names now sound, they all are found on old maps of the
Hudson.

=High Torn= is the name of the northern point of the Ramapo on the
west bank, south of Haverstraw. According to the Coast Survey, it is
820 feet above tide-water, and the view from the summit is grand and
extensive. The origin of the name is not clear, but it has lately
occurred to the writer, from a re-reading of Scott's "Peveril of the
Peak," that it might have been named from the Torn, a mountain in
Derbyshire, either from its appearance, or by some patriotic settler
from the central water-shed of England. Others say it is the
Devonshire word Tor changed to Torn, evidently derived from the same
source.

       * * *

    Emerging from these confused piles, the river as if
    rejoicing at its release from its struggle, expanded into
    a wide bay, which was ornamented by a few fertile and
    low points that jutted humbly into its broad basin.

    _James Fenimore Cooper._

       * * *

=West Shore Railroad.=--The tourist will see at this point, on the
left bank of the river, the tunnel whereby the "West Shore" finds
egress from the mountains. The traveler over this railway, on emerging
from the quiet valley west of the Palisades, comes upon a sudden
vision of beauty unrivaled in any land. The broad river seems like a
great inland lake; and the height of the tunnel above the silver bay
gives to the panoramic landscape a wondrous charm. About a mile from
the river, southwest of Grassy Point, on the farther side of the
winding Minnissickuongo Creek, which finally after long meandering
makes up its mind to glide into Stony Point Bay, will be seen Treason
Hill marked by the Joshua Hett Smith stone house where Arnold and
Andre met. The story of this meeting will be referred to at greater
length in connection with its most dramatic incident at the old
Beverley House in the Highlands. The Hudson here is about two miles
in width and narrows rapidly as we pass Grassy Point on the west bank
with its meadows and brick yards to

=Stony Point=, where it is scarcely more than half a mile to
Verplank's Point on the eastern bank. This was, therefore, an
important pass during the Revolution. The crossing near at hand was
known as King's Ferry, at and before the days of '76, and was quite an
avenue of travel between the Southern, Middle and Eastern States. The
fort crowning a commanding headland, was captured by the British, June
1, 1779, but it was surprised and recaptured by Anthony Wayne, July
15 of the same year. A centennial was observed at the place July 15,
1879, when the battle was "refought" and the West Point Cadets showed
how they would have done it if they had been on hand a century ago.
Thackeray, in his "Virginians," gives perhaps the most graphic account
of this midnight battle. The present light-house occupies the site of
the old fort, and was built in part of stone taken from its walls.
Upon its capture by the British, Washington, whose headquarters were
at New Windsor, meditated a bold stroke and summoned Anthony Wayne,
more generally known as "Mad Anthony," from his reckless daring, to
undertake its recapture with a force of one thousand picked men. The
lines were formed in two columns about 8 p.m. at "Springsteel's farm."
Each soldier and officer put a piece of white paper in his hat to
distinguish him from the foe. No guns were to be loaded under penalty
of death. General Wayne, at the head of the column, forded the marsh
covered at the time with two feet of water. The other column led by
Butler and Murfree crossed an apology for a bridge. During the advance
both columns were discovered by the British sentinels and the rocky
defense literally blazed with musketry. In stern silence, however,
without faltering, the American columns moved forward, entered the
abatis, until the advance guard under Anthony Wayne was within the
enemy's works. A bullet at this moment struck Wayne in the forehead
grazing his skull. Quickly recovering from the shock, he rose to his
knees, shouted: "Forward, my brave fellows"; then turning to two of
his followers, he asked them to help him into the fort that he might
die, if it were to be so, "in possession of the spot." Both columns
were now at hand and inspired by the brave general, came pouring
in, crying "The fort's our own." The British troops completely
overwhelmed, were fain to surrender and called for mercy. Wayne's
characteristic message to Washington antedates modern telegraphic
brevity:--"Stony Point, 2 o'clock a.m. The American flag waves
here.--Mad Anthony." There were twenty killed and sixty wounded on
each side. Some five hundred of the enemy were captured and about
sixty escaped. "Money rewards and medals were given to Wayne and
the leaders in the assault. The ordinance and stores captured were
appraised at over $180,000 and there was universal rejoicing"
throughout the land. "Stony Point State Park" was dedicated by
appropriate ceremony July 16, 1902. At the close of Governor Odell's
address the flag was raised by William Wayne, a lineal descendant of
the hero, and the cruiser "Olympia" of Manila fame boomed forth her
tribute. Verplank's Point, on the east bank (now full of brick-making
establishments), was the site of Fort Lafayette. It was here that
Baron Steuben drilled the soldiers of the American army. Back from
Green Cove above Verplanck's Point is "Knickerbocker Lake."

       * * *

  The star spangled banner, the flag of the brave,
  And the cross of old England in amity wave,
  But if ever the nations do battle again
  God send us such soldiers as Anthony Wayne.

  _Minna Irving._

       * * *

  The echoes that so boldly rung
    When cannon flashed from steep to steep,
  And freedom's airy challenge flung,
    In each romantic valley sleep.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

=Tompkin's Cove.=--North of Stony Point we see great quarries of
limestone, the principal industry of the village of Tompkin's Cove.
Gravel is also shipped from this place for Central Park roads and
driveways in New York City. The tourist, looking north from the
forward deck of the steamer, sees no opening in the mountains, and
it is amusing to hear the various conjectures of the passengers; as
usual, the "unexpected" happens. The steamer turns to the left and
sweeps at once into the grand scenery of the Highlands. The straight
forward course, which seems the more natural, would land the steamer
against the _Hudson River Railroad_, crossing the Peekskill River.
It is said that an old skipper, Jans Peek, ran up this stream, years
before the railroad was built, and did not know that he had left the
Hudson, or rather that the Hudson was "left" until he ran aground in
the shoal water of the bay. The next morning he discovered that it was
a goodly land, and the place bears his name unto this day.

       * * *

  The Highlands and the Palisades
    Mirror their beauty in the tide,
  The history of whose forest shades
    A nation reads with conscious pride.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Peekskill=, 40 miles from New York, is a pleasant city on the quiet
bay which deeply indents the eastern bank. The property in this
vicinity was known as Rycks Patent in 1665. In Revolutionary times
Fort Independence stood on the point above, where its ruins are still
seen. The Franciscan Convent Academy of "Our Lady of Angels," guards
the point below. In 1797 Peekskill was the headquarters of old Israel
Putnam, who rivaled "Mad Anthony" in brevity as well as courage. It
will be remembered that Palmer was here captured as a spy. A British
officer wrote a letter asking his reprieve, to which Putnam replied,
"Nathan Palmer was taken as a spy, tried as a spy and will be hanged
as a spy. P. S.--He is hanged." This was the birthplace of Paulding,
one of Andre's captors, and he died here in 1818. He is buried in the
old rural cemetery about two miles and a half from the village, and a
monument has been erected to his memory. Near at hand is the "Wayside
Inn," where Andre once "tarried," also the Hillside Cemetery, where on
June 19, 1898, the 123d anniversary of the battle of Bunker Hill, a
monument was unveiled to General Pomeroy by the Society of the Sons of
Revolution, New York. The church which Washington attended is in good
preservation.

Near Peekskill is the old Van Cortlandt house, the residence of
Washington for a short time during the Revolution. East of the village
was the summer home of the great pulpit orator, Henry Ward Beecher.
Peekskill was known by the Indians as Sackhoes in the territory of the
Kitchawongo, which extended from Croton River to Anthony's Nose.

[Illustration: SOUTHERN GATE OF HIGHLANDS]

Turning Caldwell's Landing or Jones' Point, formerly known as Kidd's
Point, almost at right angles, the steamer enters the southern gate of
the Highlands. At the water edge will be seen some upright planks or
caissons marking the spot where Kidd's ship was supposed to have been
scuttled. As his history seems to be intimately associated with the
Hudson, we will give it in brief:

=The Story of Captain Kidd.=--"My name was Captain Kidd as I sailed,"
are famous lines of an old ballad which was once familiar to our
grandfathers. The hapless hero of the same was born about the middle
of the seventeenth century, and it is thought, near Greenock,
Scotland. He resided at one time in New York, near the corner of
William and Cedar Streets, and was there married. In April, 1696, he
sailed from England in command of the "Adventure Galley," with full
armament and eighty men. He captured a French ship, and, on arrival at
New York, put up articles for volunteers; remained in New York three
or four months, increasing his crew to one hundred and fifty-five
men, and sailed thence to Madras, thence to Bonavista and St. Jago,
Madagascar, then to Calicut, then to Madagascar again, then sailed and
took the "Quedah Merchant." Kidd kept forty shares of the spoils, and
divided the rest with his crew. He then burned the "Adventure Galley,"
went on board the "Quedah Merchant," and steered for the West Indies.
Here he left the "Merchant," with part of his crew, under one Bolton,
as commander. Then manned a sloop, and taking part of his spoils, went
to Boston via Long Island Sound, and is said to have set goods on
shore at different places. In the meantime, in August, 1698, the East
Indian Company informed the Lords Justice that Kidd had committed
several acts of piracy, particularly in seizing a Moor's ship called
the "Quedah Merchant." When Kidd landed at Boston he was therefore
arrested by the Earl of Bellamont, and sent to England for trial,
1699, where he was found guilty and executed. Now it is supposed that
the crew of the "Quedah Merchant," which Kidd left at Hispaniola,
sailed for their homes, as the crew was mostly gathered from the
Highlands and above. It is said that they passed New York in the
night, _en route_ to the manor of Livingston; but encountering a gale
in the Highlands, and thinking they were pursued, ran her near the
shore, now known as Kidd's Point, and here scuttled her, the crew
fleeing to the woods with such treasure as they could carry. Whether
this circumstance was true or not, it was at least a current story in
the neighborhood, and an enterprising individual, about fifty years
ago, _caused an old cannon_ to be "discovered" in the river, and
perpetrated the first "Cardiff Giant Hoax." A New York Stock Company
was organized to prosecute the work. It was said that the ship could
be seen in clear days, with her masts still standing, many fathoms
below the surface. One thing is certain--the company did not see it or
the _treasurer_ either, in whose hands were deposited about $30,000.

       * * *

  Beauty and majesty on either hand
  Have shared thy waters with their common realm.

  _Knickerbocker Magazine._

       * * *

  Their summits are the first to meet
     The morning's golden ray,
  And last to catch the crimson fires
    That warm the dying day.

  _Minna Irving._

       * * *

On the west shore rise the rock-beaten crags of--

=The Dunderberg=, the dread of the Dutch mariners. This hill,
according to Irving, was peopled with a multitude of imps, too great
for man to number, who wore sugar-loaf hats and short doublets, and
had a picturesque way of "tumbling head over heels in the rack and
mist." They were especially malignant toward all captains who failed
to do them reverence, and brought down frightful squalls on such craft
as failed to drop the peaks of their mainsails to the goblin who
presided over this shadowy republic. It was the dread of the early
navigators--in fact, the Olympus of Dutch mythology. Verditege Hook,
the Dunderberg, and the Overslaugh, were names of terror to even the
bravest skipper. The old burghers of New York never thought of making
their week's voyage to Albany without arranging their wills, and it
created as much commotion in New Amsterdam as a modern expedition to
the north pole. Dunderberg, in most of the Hudson Guides and Maps, is
put down as 1,098 feet, but its actual altitude by the latest United
States Geological Survey is 865 feet.

The State National Guard Encampment crowns a bluff, formerly known as
Roa Hook, on the east bank, north of Peekskill Bay, a happy location
in the midst of history and beauty. Every regiment in the State
rallies here in turn during the summer months for instruction in the
military art, living in tents and enjoying life in true army style.
Visitors are cordially greeted at proper hours, and the camp is easily
reached by ferry from Peekskill. A ferry also runs from Peekskill to
Dunderberg, affording a hillside outing and a delightful view. It is
expected that a spiral railroad, fourteen miles in length, undertaken
by a recently organized corporation, but abandoned for the present,
will make the spot a great Hudson River resort. The plan also embraces
a palatial hotel on the summit and pleasure grounds upon the point at
its base. Passing Manito Mountain on our right the steamer approaches

=Anthony's Nose=, a prominent feature of the Hudson.

       * * *

    The waters were hemmed in by abrupt and dark
    mountains, but the channel was still broad and smooth
    enough for all the steamboats in the Republic to ride
    in safety.

    _Harriet Martineau._

       * * *

[Illustration: ANTHONY'S NOSE.]

Strangely enough the altitude of the mountains at the southern portal
of the Highlands has been greatly overrated. The formerly accepted
height of Anthony's Nose has been reduced by the Geological Survey
from 1,228 feet to 900. It has, however, an illustrious christening,
and according to various historians several godfathers. One says
it was named after St. Anthony the Great, the first institutor of
monastic life, born A. D. 251, at Coma, in Heraclea, a town in Upper
Egypt. Irving's humorous account is, however, quite as probable that
it was _derived_ from the nose of Antony Van Corlear, the illustrious
trumpeter of Peter Stuyvesant. "Now thus it happened that bright and
early in the morning the good Antony, having washed his burly visage,
was leaning over the quarter-railing of the galley, contemplating it
in the glassy waves below. Just at this moment the illustrious
sun, breaking in all his splendor from behind a high bluff of the
Highlands, did dart one of his most potent beams full upon the
refulgent _nose_ of the sounder of brass, the reflection of which
shot straightway down hissing hot into the water, and killed a mighty
sturgeon that was sporting beside the vessel. When this astonishing
miracle was made known to the Governor, and he tasted of the unknown
fish, he marveled exceedingly; and, as a monument thereof, he gave the
name of Anthony's Nose to a stout promontory in the neighborhood,
and it has continued to be called Anthony's Nose ever since." It
was called by the Indians "Kittatenny," a Delaware term, signifying
"endless hills." The stream flowing into the river south of Anthony's
Nose is known as the Brocken Kill, broken into beautiful cascades from
mountain source to mouth.

       * * *

    The beautiful and in some places highly singular
    banks of the Hudson rendered a voyage both amusing
    and interesting, while the primitive manners of the inhabitants
    diverted the gay and idle and pleased
    the thoughtful and speculative.

    _Mrs. Grant of Laggan._

       * * *

=Iona Island=, formerly a pleasure resort and picnic ground. An
old-time joke of the Hudson was frequently perpetrated on strangers
while passing the island. Some one would innocently observe, "I own
a island on the Hudson." When any one obligingly asked, "Where?" the
reply would be with pointed finger, "Why there." But the United States
Government _owns_ it now against all comers, and its quiet lanes and
picnic abandon have been exchanged for busy machine shops and military
discipline. It is near the west bank, opposite Anthony's Nose. A
short distance from the island, on the main land, was the village or
cross-roads of Doodletown. This reach of the river was formerly known
as The Horse Race, from the rapid flow of the tide when at its height.
The hills on the west bank now recede from the river, forming a
picturesque amphitheatre, bounded on the west by Bear Mountain. An
old road directly in the rear of Iona Island, better known to Anthony
Wayne than to the modern tourist, passes through Doodletown, over
Dunderberg, just west of Tompkin's Cove, to Haverstraw. Here amid
these pleasant foothills Morse laid the scene of a historical romance,
which he however happily abandoned for a wider invention. The world
can get along without the novel, but it would be a trifle slow without
the telegraph. On the west bank, directly opposite the railroad tunnel
which puts a merry "ring" into the tip of Anthony's Nose, is what is
now known as Highland Lake, called by the Indians "Sinnipink," and by
the immediate descendants of our Revolutionary fathers "Hessian
Lake" or "Bloody Pond," from the fact that an American company were
mercilessly slaughtered here by the Hessians, and, after the surrender
of Fort Montgomery, their bodies were thrown into the lake.

       * * *

  Behold again the wildwood shade,
  The mountain steep, the checkered glade,
  And hoary rocks and bubbling rills,
  And pointed waves and distant hills.

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

The capture of Fort Clinton and Fort Montgomery was two years before
Mad Anthony's successful assault on Stony Point. Early in the history
of the Revolution, the British Government thought that it would be
possible to cut off the eastern from the middle and southern Colonies
by capturing and garrisoning commanding points along the Hudson and
Lake Champlain. It was therefore decided in London, in the spring of
1777, to have Sir Henry Clinton approach from the south and Burgoyne
from the north. Reinforcements, however, arrived late from England and
it was September before Clinton transported his troops, about 4,000
in number, in warships and flat-boats up the river. Governor George
Clinton was in charge of Fort Montgomery, and his brother James of
Fort Clinton, while General Putnam, with about 2,000 men, had his
headquarters at Peekskill. In addition to these forts, a chain was
stretched across the Hudson from Anthony's Nose to a point near the
present railroad bridge, to obstruct the British fleet. General
Putnam, however, became convinced that Sir Henry Clinton proposed
to attack Fort Independence. Most of the troops were accordingly
withdrawn from Forts Montgomery and Clinton, when Sir Henry Clinton,
taking advantage of a morning fog, crossed with 2,000 men at King's
Ferry. Guided by a sympathizer of the British cause, who knew the
district, he crossed the Dunderberg Mountain by the road just
indicated. One division of 900 moving on Fort Montgomery, and another
of 1,100 on Fort Clinton. Governor Clinton in the meantime ordered 400
soldiers to Fort Montgomery, and his reconnoitering party, met by the
Hessians, fell back upon the fort, fighting as it retreated. Governor
Clinton sent to General Putnam for reinforcements, but it is said that
the messenger deserted, so that Putnam literally sat waiting in camp,
unconscious of the enemy's movements. A simultaneous attack was made
at 5 o'clock in the afternoon on both forts. Lossing says: "The
garrisons were composed mostly of untrained militia. They behaved
nobly, and kept up the defense vigorously, against a greatly superior
force of disciplined and veteran soldiers, until twilight, when they
were overpowered, and sought safety in a scattered retreat to the
neighboring mountains. Many escaped, but a considerable number were
slain or made prisoners. The Governor fled across the river in a
boat, and at midnight was with General Putnam at Continental Village,
concerting measures for stopping the invasion. James, forcing his way
to the rear, across the highway bridge, received a bayonet wound in
the thigh, but safely reached his home at New Windsor. A sloop of ten
guns, the frigate "Montgomery"--twenty-four guns--and two row-galleys,
stationed near the boom and chain for their protection, slipped their
cables and attempted to escape, but there was no wind to fill their
sails, and they were burned by the Americans to prevent their falling
into the hands of the enemy. The frigate "Congress," twenty-eight
guns, which had already gone up the river, shared the same fate on the
flats near Fort Constitution, which was abandoned. By the light of the
burning vessels the fugitive garrisons made their way over the rugged
mountains, and a large portion of them joined General Clinton at New
Windsor the next day. They had left many of their brave companions
behind, who, to the number of 250, had been slain or taken prisoners.
The British, too, had parted with many men and brave officers. Among
the latter was Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell. Early in the morning of
the 7th of October, the river obstructions between Fort Montgomery and
Anthony's Nose, which cost the Americans $250,000, were destroyed, and
a light flying squadron, commanded by Sir James Wallace, and bearing a
large number of land troops under General Vaughan, sailed up the river
on a marauding expedition, with instructions from Sir Henry to scatter
desolation in their paths. It was hoped that such an expedition would
draw troops from the Northern army for the protection of the country
below, and thereby assist Burgoyne."

       * * *

  I love thy tempests when the broad-winged blast
    Rouses thy billows with his battle call,
  When gathering clouds, in phalanx black and vast
    Like armed shadows gird thy rocky wall.

  _Knickerbocker Magazine._

       * * *

Sir Henry Clinton, who had been advised by General Burgoyne that he
must be relieved by October 12th, sent a messenger announcing his
victory. Another of the many special providences of the American
Revolution now occurs. The messenger blundered into the American camp,
where some soldiers sat in British uniform, and found out too late
that he was among enemies instead of friends. As Irving relates the
incident in his "Life of Washington":

--"On the 9th (October) two persons coming from Fort Montgomery were
arrested by the guard, and brought for examination. One was much
agitated, and was observed to put something hastily into his mouth
and swallow it. An emetic was administered, and brought up a silver
bullet. Before he could be prevented he swallowed it again. On his
refusing a second emetic, the Governor threatened to have him hanged
and his body opened. This threat was effectual and the bullet was
again 'brought to light.' It was oval in form, and hollow, with a
screw in the centre, and contained a note from Sir Henry Clinton to
Burgoyne, written on a slip of thin paper, and dated October 8th, from
Fort Montgomery: '_Nous y voici_ (here we are), and nothing between
us and Gates. I sincerely hope this little success of ours will
facilitate your operations.' Burgoyne never received it, and
on October 13th, after the battles of Bennington and Saratoga,
surrendered to General Gates. Sir Henry Clinton abandoned the forts on
hearing of his defeat, and returned to New York 'a sadder and wiser
man.'"

       * * *

  Columbia! Columbia! to glory arise,
  The queen of the earth and the child of the skies.

  _Timothy Dwight._

       * * *

  Far up the Hudson's silver flood
    I hear the Highlands call
  With whispering of leafy boughs
    And voice of waterfall.

  _Minna Irving._

       * * *

=Beverley House.=--Passing Cohn's Hook, pronounced Connosook, where
Hendrick Hudson anchored on his way up the river September 14, 1609,
we see before us on the right bank a point coming down to the shore
marked by a boat house. This is Beverley Dock, and directly up the
river bank about an eighth of a mile stood the old Beverley House,
where Benedict Arnold had his headquarters when in command of
West Point. The old house, a good specimen of colonial times, was
unfortunately burned in 1892, and with it went the most picturesque
landmark of the most dramatic incident of the Revolution. It will
be remembered that Arnold returned to the Beverley House after his
midnight interview with Andre at Haverstraw, and immediately upon the
capture of Andre the following day, that Colonel Jamison sent a letter
to Arnold, advising him of the fact. It was the morning of September
4th. General Washington was on his way to West Point, coming across
the country from Connecticut. On arriving, however, at the river,
just above the present station of Garrison, he became interested in
examining some defenses, and sent Alexander Hamilton forward to the
Beverley House, saying that he would come later, requesting the
family to proceed with their breakfast and not to await his arrival.
Alexander Hamilton and General Lafayette sat gayly chatting with Mrs.
Arnold and her husband when the letter from Jamison was received.
Arnold glanced at the contents, rose and excused himself from the
table, beckoning to his wife to follow him, bade her good-bye, told
her he was a ruined man and a traitor, kissed his little boy in the
cradle, rode to Beverley Dock, and ordered his men to pull off and
go down the river. The "Vulture," an English man-of-war, was near
Teller's Point, and received a traitor, whose miserable treachery
branded him with eternal infamy on both continents. It is said that
he lived long enough to be hissed in the House of Commons, as he once
took his seat in the gallery, and he died friendless and despised. It
is also said, when Talleyrand arrived in Havre on foot from Paris, in
the darkest hour of the French Revolution, pursued by the bloodhounds
of the reign of terror, and was about to secure a passage to the
United States, he asked the landlord of the hotel whether any
Americans were staying at his house, as he was going across the water,
and would like a letter to a person of influence in the New World.
"There is a gentleman up-stairs from Britain or America," was the
response. He pointed the way, and Talleyrand ascended the stairs. In a
dimly lighted room sat a man of whom the great minister of France was
to ask a favor. He advanced, and poured forth in elegant French and
broken English, "I am a wanderer, and an exile. I am forced to fly to
the New World without a friend or home. You are an American. Give me,
then, I beseech you, a letter of yours, so that I may be able to earn
my bread." The strange gentleman rose. With a look that Talleyrand
never forgot, he retreated toward the door of the next chamber. He
spoke as he retreated, and his voice was full of suffering: "I am the
only man of the New World who can raise his hand to God and say,
'I have not a friend, not one, in America!'" "Who are you?" he
cried--"your name?" "My name is Benedict Arnold!"

       * * *

  Wayne, Putnam, Knox and Heath are there,
    Steuben, proud Prussia's honored son;
  Brave Lafayette from France the fair,
    And chief of all our Washington.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

Andre's fate on the other hand was widely lamented. He was universally
beloved by his comrades and possessed a rich fund of humor which often
bubbled over in verse. It is a strange coincidence that his best
poetic attempt on one of Anthony Wayne's exploits near Fort Lee,
entitled "The Cow Chase," closed with a graphically prophetic verse:

  "And now I've closed my epic strain,
    I tremble as I show it,
  Lest this same Warrior-Drover Wayne
    Should ever catch the poet."

By a singular coincidence he did: General Wayne was in command of the
Tarrytown and Tappan country where Andre was captured and executed. It
is also said that these lines were published by one of the Tory papers
in New York the very day of Andre's capture. One of the old-time
characters on the Hudson, known as Uncle Richard, has recently thrown
new light on the capture of Andre by claiming, with a touch of genuine
humor, that it was entirely due to the "effects" of cider which had
been freely "dispensed" that day by a certain Mr. Horton, a farmer in
the neighborhood.

       * * *

  In view of all he lost,--his youth, his love,
    And possibilities that wait the brave,
  Inward and outward bound dim visions move
    Like passing sails upon the Hudson's wave.

  _Charlotte Fiske Bates._

       * * *

It is impossible even in these later years, not to speak of
twenty-five or fifty years ago, to travel along the shores of
Haverstraw Bay or among the passes of the Highlands, without hearing
some old-time stories about Arnold and Andre, and it would be strange
indeed if a little romance had not here and there become blended with
the real facts. Uncle Richard's account is undoubtedly the best since
the days of Knickerbocker. "Benedict Arnold, you know, had command of
West Point, and he knew that the place was essential to the success of
the Continental cause. He plotted, as everybody knows, to turn it
over to the enemy, and in the correspondence which he carried on with
General Clinton, young Andre, Clinton's aid, did all the writing.
Things were coming to a focus, when a meeting took place between
Arnold and Clinton's representative, Andre, at the house of Joshua
Hett Smith, near Haverstraw. Andre came on the British ship "Vulture,"
which he left at Croton Point, in Haverstraw Bay. Well," so runs Uncle
Richard's story, "it took a long time to get matters settled; they
'confabbed' till after daybreak. Then Arnold started back to the post
which he had plotted to surrender. But daylight was no time for Andre
to return to the "Vulture," so he hung round waiting for night.

"During that day, some men who were working for James Horton, a farmer
on the ridge overlooking the river, who gave his men good rations of
cider, drank a little too much of the hard stuff. They felt good, and
thought it would be a fine joke to load and fire off an old disabled
cannon which lay a mile or so away on the bank. They hauled it to the
point now called Cockroft Point, propped it up, and then the spirit
of fun--and hard cider--prompted them to train the old piece on the
British ship "Vulture," lying at anchor in the Bay. The "Vulture's"
people must have overestimated the source of the fire, for the ship
dropped down the river, and Andre had to abandon the idea of returning
by that means. He crossed the river at King's Ferry, and while on his
way overland was captured at Tarrytown.

"Of course, the three brave men who refused to be bribed deserve all
the glory they ever had; if it were not for them, who knows but the
revolutionary war would have had a different ending. But they never
would have had a chance to capture Andre if it had not been for James
Horton's men warming up on hard cider. Hard cider broke the plans
of Arnold, it hung Andre, and it saved West Point." A boy misguided
Grouchy _en route_ to Waterloo. On what small hinges turn the
destinies of nations!

       * * *

    A slanting ray lingered on the woody crests of the precipices that
    overhung the river, giving greater depth to the dark-gray and
    purple of the rocky sides.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

All the way from Anthony's Nose to Beverley Dock, where we have been
lingering over the story of Andre, we have been literally turning a
kaleidoscope of blended history and beauty, with scarcely time to note
the delightful homes on the west bank, just above Fort Montgomery.
Among them J. Pierpont Morgan's and the Pells', John Bigelow's and
"Benny Havens'," or on the east bank of Hamilton Fish, just above
Beverley Dock, Samuel Sloan and the late William H. Osborn, just north
of Sugar Loaf Mountain; the mountain being so named as it resembles,
to one coming up the river, the old-fashioned conical-shaped
sugar-loaf, which was formerly suspended by a string over the centre
of the hospitable Dutch tables, and swung around to be occasionally
nibbled at, which in good old Knickerbocker days, was thought to be
the best and only orthodox way of sweetening tea.

=Buttermilk Falls=, so christened by Washington Irving, is a pretty
little cascade on the west bank. Like sparkling wit, it is often dry,
and the tourist is exceptionally fortunate who sees it in full-dress
costume after a heavy shower, when it rushes over the rocks in floods
of snow-white foam. Highland Falls is the name of a small village a
short distance west of the river, on the bluff, but not seen from the
deck of the steamer.

The large building above the rocky channel is Lady Cliff, the Academy
of Our Lady of Angels, under the Franciscan Sisters at Peekskill,
opened September, 1900. It was originally built for a hotel, and
widely known as Cranston's Hotel and Landing. As the steamer is now
approaching the west bank we see above us the Cullum Memorial Hall,
completed in 1899, a bequest of the late George W. Cullum of the class
of 1833. The still newer structure to the south is the officers'
messroom, crowning the crest above the landing.

       * * *

  Then, as you nearer draw, each wooded height
  Puts off the azure hues by distance given!
  And slowly breaks upon the enamored sight,
  Ravine, crag, field and wood in colors true and bright.

  _Theodore S. Fay._

       * * *

=West Point=, taken all in all, is the most beautiful tourist spot on
the Hudson. Excursionists by the Day Boats from New York, returning
by afternoon steamer, have three hours to visit the various places
of history and beauty. To make an easy mathematical formula or
picturesque "rule of three" statement, what Quebec is to the St.
Lawrence, West Point is to the Hudson. If the citadel of Quebec is
more imposing, the view of the Hudson at this place is grander than
that of the St. Lawrence, and the ruins of Fort Putnam are almost as
venerable as the Heights of Abraham. The sensation of the visitor is,
moreover, somewhat the same in both places as to the environment of
law and authority. To get the daily character and quality of West
Point one should spend at least twenty-four hours within its borders,
and a good hotel, the only one on the Government grounds, will be
found central and convenient to everything of interest. The parade and
drills at sunset hour can best be seen in this way.

=The United States Military Academy.=--Soon after the close of the War
of the Revolution, Washington suggested West Point as the site of a
military academy, and, in 1793, in his annual message, recommended it
to Congress, which in 1794 organized a corps of artillerists to be
here stationed with thirty-two cadets, enlarging the number in 1798 to
fifty-six. In 1808 it was increased to one hundred and fifty-six, and
in 1812 to two hundred and sixty.

Up to 1812 only 71 cadets had been graduated. The roll of graduates
now numbers about 5,000.

Each Congressman has the appointment of one cadet, supplemented by
ten appointed by the President of the United States. These cadets are
members of the regular army, subject to its regulations for eight
years, viz: during four years of study and four years after
graduating. The candidates are examined in June, each year, and must
be physically sound as well as mentally qualified. The course is very
thorough, especially in higher mathematics. The cadets go into camp in
July and August, and this is the pleasantest time to visit the point.

       * * *

  Enchanted place, hemmed in by mountain walls,
  By bristling guns and Hudson's restful shore.

  _Kenneth Bruce._

       * * *

The plans furnished by the architects of the new building will
entirely change the appearance of the river front. The proposed
massive structure crowning the cliff will "out-castle" the most
massive fortifications of the walled cities of Europe. $7,500,000 has
been appropriated to the work by Congress and the next generation will
behold a new West Point.

In the rebuilding of the Post the Cadet Chapel, the Riding Hall, the
Administration Building and some of the Officers' Quarters will be
removed. Most of the old important buildings, however, will not be
disturbed, and the Chapel will be placed as it were "intact" on
another site. The plan leaves untouched the Cadet Barracks, the Cadet
Mess, the Memorial Hall, the Library and the Officers' Mess. The
tower of the new Post Headquarters will rise high and massive several
stories above the other structures and present in enduring symbol the
republic standing four square and firm throughout the ages.

In the "West Point Souvenir," prepared by W. H. Tripp, which every
visitor will prize, are many suggestions and descriptions of value.
From many visits and many sources we condense the following brevities:

=The Cadet Barracks= was built in 1845-51 of native granite. In 1882
the western wing was extended adding two divisions.

=The Academy Building= is immediately opposite the Headquarters, of
Massachusetts granite, erected in 1891-95, and cost about $500,000.
It contains recitation and lecture rooms of all departments of
instruction.

=The Ordnance Museum= contains an interesting and extensive exhibit
of ancient and modern firearms, also many valuable trophies from the
Revolutionary, Mexican, Civil and Spanish wars.

       * * *

    Among the fair and lovely Highlands of the Hudson, shut in by deep
    green heights and ruined forts, hemmed in all round with memories
    of Washington, there could be no more appropriate ground for the
    military school of America.

    _Charles Dickens._

       * * *

=The Cadet Chapel=, immediately north of the Administration Building,
was erected in 1834. The chapel contains many valuable trophies of
the Revolutionary and Mexican wars, including three Hessian and two
British flags that were once the property of Washington. The walls
have many memorial tablets and a famous "blank" of Arnold. Here also
are several cannon surrendered at Saratoga, October 17, 1777.

=The Administration Building= was completed in 1871.

=The Library= adjoins the Cadet Chapel on the east, built of native
granite in 1841, costing about $15,000. In 1900 the building was
entirely reconstructed of fire-proof material by appropriation of
$80,000. The exterior walls of the original building entered into the
remodeled structure. The Library, founded in 1812, has about 50,000
volumes.

=The Gymnasium= adjoins the Barracks on the west, erected of native
granite, costing $90,000.

=Memorial Hall=, plainly seen from the Hudson, completed in 1899, is
of Ionic architecture. The building cost $268,000, a legacy bequeathed
by Gen. George W. Cullum, built of Milford granite for army trophies
of busts, paintings and memorials. The bronze statute of Gen. John
Sedgwick in the northwest angle of the plain was dedicated in 1868.
The fine cenotaph of Italian marble was erected in 1885. It stands
immediately in front of Memorial Hall.

=Kosciusko's Monument= was erected in 1828. It stands in the northeast
angle of Fort Clinton.

=The Chain-Battery= walk runs from Kosciusko's Garden northward to
Light House Point, near which was the battery that defended the chain
across the river in the Revolution. The scene is of great beauty and
has been known for many years by the name of "Flirtation Walk."

       * * *

  Where Kosciusko dreamed and proud scenes bring
  To mind the stormy days when Liberty
  Was cradled at West Point--the Highlands' key.

  _Kenneth Bruce._

       * * *

[Illustration: BATTLE MONUMENT, WEST POINT]

=The Battle Monument=, on Trophy Point, is the most beautiful on the
reservation--a column of victory in memory of 2,230 officers and
soldiers of the regular army of the United States who were killed or
died of wounds received in the war of the Rebellion. It is a monolith
of polished granite surmounted by a figure of Fame. The shaft is 46
feet in length, 5 feet in diameter, and said to be the largest piece
of polished stone in the world. The cost of the work was $66,000. The
site was dedicated June 15, 1864. The monument was dedicated in 1897.
The address was by Justice Brewer.

=Trophy Point=, on the north side of the plain, overlooking the river
and commanding a majestic view of the Hudson and the city of Newburgh,
has been likened by European travelers to a view on Lake Geneva.
Here are the "swivel clevies" and 16 links of the old chain that was
stretched across the river at this point. The whole chain, 1,700
feet long, weighing 186 tons, was forged at the Sterling Iron Works,
transported to New Windsor and there attached to log booms and floated
down the river to this point.

=Old Fort Putnam= was erected in 1778 by the 5th Massachusetts
Regiment under the direction of Col. Rufus Putnam. It was originally
constructed of logs and trees with stone walls on two sides to defend
Fort Clinton on the plain below. It was garrisoned by 450 men, and had
14 guns mounted. In 1787 it was dismantled, and the guns sold as
old iron. Its brick arch casements overgrown with moss, vines, and
shrubbery are crumbling away, but are well worth a visit. It is 495
feet above the Hudson. A winding picturesque carriage road leads up
from the plain, and the pedestrian can reach the summit in 20 minutes.
On clear days the Catskill Mountains are visible.

=Fort Clinton=, in the northeast angle of the plain, was built in
1778 under the direction of the Polish soldier, Kosciusko. Sea Coast
Battery is located on the north waterfront, Siege Battery on the slope
of the hill below the Battle Monument. Targets for the guns on both
batteries are on the hillside about a mile distant. Battery Knox,
which overlooks the river, was rebuilt in 1874 on the site of an old
revolutionary redoubt.

       * * *

  Bright are the moments link'd with thee,
    Boast of a glory-hallowed land!
  Hope of the valiant and the free,
    Home of our youthful soldier band!

  _Anonymous._

       * * *

While Fort Putnam was being built Washington was advised that Dubois's
regiment was unfit to be ordered on duty, there being "not one blanket
in the regiment. Very few have either a shoe or a shirt, and most of
them have neither stockings, breeches, or overalls. Several companies
of inlisted artificers are in the same situation, and unable to work
in the field."

What privations were here endured to establish our priceless liberty!
It makes better Americans of us all to turn and re-turn the pages of
the real Hudson, the most picturesque volume of the world's history.

West Point during the Revolution was the Gibraltar of the Hudson
and her forts were regarded almost impregnable. Fort Putnam will be
rebuilt as an enduring monument to the bravery of American soldiers.

The best way to study West Point, however, is not in voluminous
histories or in the condensed pages of a guide book, but to visit it
and see its real life, to wander amid its old associations, and
ask, when necessary, intelligent questions, which are everywhere
courteously answered. The view north seen in a summer evening, is one
long to be remembered. In such an hour the writer's idea of the Hudson
as an open book with granite pages and crystal book-mark is most
completely realized as indicated in the Highland section of his poem,
"The Hudson":

  On either side these mountain glens
    Lie open like a massive book,
  Whose words were graved with iron pens,
    And lead into the eternal rock:

  Which evermore shall here retain
    The annals time cannot erase,
  And while these granite leaves remain
    This crystal ribbon marks the place.

       * * *

    Under Spring's delicate marshalling every hill of the Highlands
    took its own place, and the soft swells of ground stood back the
    one from the other in more and more tender coloring.

    _Susan Warner._

       * * *

[Illustration: LOOKING NORTH FROM WEST POINT BATTERY]

=West Point to Newburgh.=

The steamer passes too near the west bank to give a view of the
magnificent plateau with parade ground and Government buildings, but
on rounding the point a picture of marvelous beauty breaks at once
upon the vision. On the left the massive indented ridge of Old Cro'
Nest and Storm King, and on the right Mount Taurus, or Bull Hill, and
Break Neck, while still further beyond toward the east sweeps the
Fishkill range, sentineled by South Beacon, 1,625 feet in height, from
whose summit midnight gleams aroused the countryside for leagues and
scores of miles during those seven long years when men toiled
and prayed for freedom. Close at hand on the right will be seen
Constitution Island, formerly the home of Miss Susan Warner, who died
in 1885, author of "Queechy" and the "Wide, Wide World." Here the
ruins of the old fort are seen. The place was once called Martalaer's
Rock Island. A chain was stretched across the river at this point to
intercept the passage of boats up the Hudson, but proved ineffectual,
like the one at Anthony's Nose, as the impetus of the boats snapped
them both like cords.

Some years ago, when the first delegation of Apache Indians was
brought to Washington to sign a treaty of peace, the Indians were
taken for an "outing" up the Hudson, by General O. O. Howard and Dr.
Herman Bendell, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Arizona. It is
said that they noted with cold indifference the palaces along the
river front: "the artistic terraces, the well-kept, sloping lawns, the
clipped hedges and the ivy-grown walls made no impression on them, but
when the magnificent picture of the Hudson above West Point revealed
itself, painted by the rays of the sinking sun, these wild men stood
erect, raised their hands high above their heads and uttered a
monosyllabic expression of delight, which was more expressive than
volumes of words."

       * * *

  The queenly Hudson circling at thy feet
    Lingers to sing a song of joy and love,
  Pouring her heart in rippling wavelets sweet,
    Which sun-kissed glance up to thy throne above.

  _Kenneth Bruce._

       * * *

Sir Robert Temple also rises into rapture over the northern gate
of the Highlands. "One of the fairest spectacles to be seen on the
earth's surface; not on any other river or strait--not on Ganges or
Indus, on the Dardanelles or the Bosphorus, on the Danube or the
Rhine, on the Neva or the Nile--have I ever observed so fairy-like a
scene as this on the Hudson. The only water-view to rival it is that
of the Sea of Marmora, opposite Constantinople."

Most people who visit our river, naturally desire a brilliant sunlit
day for their journey, and with reason, but there are effects, in fog
and rain and driving mist, only surpassed amid the Kyles of Bute,
in Scotland. The traveler is fortunate, who sees the Hudson in many
phases, and under various atmospheric conditions. A midnight view is
peculiarly impressive when the mountain spirits of Rodman Drake answer
to the call of his "Culprit Fay."

  "'Tis the middle watch of a summer night,
  The earth is dark but the heavens are bright,
  The moon looks down on Old Cro' Nest--
  She mellows the shade on his shaggy breast,
  And seems his huge gray form to throw
  In a silver cone on the wave below."

It is said that the "Culprit Fay" was written by Drake in three days,
and grew out of a discussion which took place during a stroll through
this part of the Highlands between Irving, Halleck, Cooper and
himself, as to the filling of a new country with old-time legends.
Drake died in 1820. Halleck's lines to his memory are among the
sweetest in our language. It is said that Halleck, on hearing Drake
read his poem, "The American Flag," sprang to his feet, and in a
semi-poetic transport, concluded the lines with burning words, which
Drake afterwards appended:

  "Forever float that standard sheet,
    Where breathes the foe but falls before us,
  With Freedom's soil beneath our feet,
    And Freedom's banner streaming o'er us."

       * * *

  It floweth deep and strong and wide
    This river of romance
  Along whose banks on moonlight nights
    The Highland fairies dance.

  _E. A. Lente._

       * * *

Just opposite Old Cro' Nest is the village of Cold Spring, on the east
bank, which receives its name naturally from a cold spring in the
vicinity; and it is interesting to remember that the famous Parrott
guns were made at this place, and many implements of warfare during
our civil strife. The foundry was started by Gouverneur Kemble in
1828, and brought into wide renown by the inventive genius of Major
Parrott. Cold Spring has a further distinction in having the first
ground broken, about three miles from the river, for the greatest
engineering enterprise of the age--"The Water Supply of the
Catskills," when Mayor McClellan, in June, 1907, began the work with
his silver shovel. A short distance north of the village is

=Undercliff= (built by John C. Hamilton, son of Alexander Hamilton,
but more particularly associated with the memory of the poet, Col.
George P. Morris), lies, in fact, _under the cliff_ and shadow of
Mount Taurus, and has a fine outlook upon the river and surrounding
mountains. Standing on the piazza, we see directly in front of us Old
Cro' Nest, and it was here that the poet wrote:

  "Where Hudson's wave o'er silvery sands
    Winds through the hills afar,
  _Old Cro' Nest like a monarch stands
    Crowned with a single star_."

Few writers were better known in their own day than the poet of
Undercliff, who wrote "My Mother's Bible," and "Woodman, Spare that
Tree." On one occasion, when Mr. Russell was singing it at Boulogne,
an old gentleman in the audience, moved by the simple and touching
beauty of the lines,

  "Forgive the foolish tear,
     But let the old oak stand."

rose and said: "I beg your pardon, but was the tree really spared?"
"It was," answered Mr. Russell, and the old gentleman resumed his
seat, amid the plaudits of the whole assembly. Truly

  "Its glory and renown
    Are spread o'er land and sea."

       * * *

  When freedom from her mountain height
    Unfurled her standard to the air,
  She tore the azure robe of night
    And set the stars of glory there.

  _Joseph Rodman Drake._

       * * *

The first European name given to Storm King was Klinkersberg (so
called by Hendrick Hudson, from its glistening and broken rock). It
was styled by the Dutch "Butter Hill," from its shape, and, with
Sugar Loaf on the eastern side below the point, helped to set out the
tea-table for the Dunderberg goblins. It was christened by Willis,
"Storm King," and may well be regarded the El Capitan of the
Highlands. Breakneck is opposite, on the east side, where St.
Anthony's Face was blasted away. In this mountain solitude there was a
shade of reason in giving that solemn countenance of stone the name
of St. Anthony, as a good representative of monastic life; and, by a
quiet sarcasm, the full-length nose below was probably suggested.

The mountain opposite Cro' Nest is "Bull Hill," or more classically,
"Mt. Taurus." It is said that there was formerly a wild bull in these
mountains, which had failed to win the respect and confidence of the
inhabitants, so the mountaineers organized a hunt and drove him over
the hill, whose name stands a monument to his exit. The point at the
foot of "Mount Taurus" is known as "Little Stony Point."

The Highlands now trend off to the northeast, and we see North Beacon,
or Grand Sachem Mountain, and Old Beacon about half a mile to the
north. The mountains were relit with beacon-fires in 1883, in honor of
the centennials of Fishkill and Newburgh, and were plainly seen sixty
miles distant.

This section was known by the Indians as "Wequehache," or, "the Hill
Country," and the entire range was called by the Indians "the endless
hills," a name not inappropriate to this mountain bulwark reaching
from New England to the Carolinas. As pictured in our "Long Drama,"
given at the Newburgh centennial of the disbanding of the American
Army,

  That ridge along our eastern coast,
    From Carolina to the Sound,
  Opposed its front to Britain's host,
    And heroes at each pass were found:

  A vast primeval palisade,
    With bastions bold and wooded crest,
  A bulwark strong by nature made
    To guard the valley of the west.

  Along its heights the beacons gleamed,
    It formed the nation's battle-line,
  Firm as the rocks and cliffs where dreamed
    The soldier-seers of Palestine.

It was also believed by the Indians that, in ancient days, "before the
Hudson poured its waters from the lakes, the Highlands formed one vast
prison, within whose rocky bosom the omnipotent Manitou confined
the rebellious spirits who repined at his control. Here, bound in
adamantine chains, or jammed in rifted pines, or crushed by ponderous
rocks, they groaned for many an age. At length the conquering Hudson,
in its career toward the ocean, burst open their prison-house, rolling
its tide triumphantly through the stupendous ruins."

       * * *

    The Highlands are here moulded in all manner of heights and
    hollows; sometimes reaching up abruptly to twelve or fifteen
    hundred feet, and again stretching away in long gorges and gentle
    declivities.

    _Susan Warner._

       * * *

=Pollopel's Island=, east of the steamer's route, was once regarded as
a haunted spot, but its only witches are said to be snakes too lively
to be enchanted. In old times, the "new hands" on the sloops were
unceremoniously dipped at this place, so as to be proof-christened
against the goblins of the Highlands. Here also another useless
"impediment" was put across the Hudson in 1779, a chevaux-de-frise
with iron-pointed spikes thirty feet long, hidden under water,
strongly secured by cribs of stone. This, however, was not broken and
would probably have done effective work if some traitor to the cause
had not guided the British captains through an unprotected passage.
The State at one time contemplated the purchase of this island on
which to erect a statue to Hendrick Hudson. For some reason Governor
Flower vetoed the bill. It is now owned by Mr. Francis Bannerman,
an energetic business man, who perhaps some day may see his way to
promote a monument to Hudson on the splendid pedestal which nature has
already completed.

       * * *

  What sights and sounds at which the world has wondered
    Within these wild ravines have had their birth!
  Young Freedom's cannon from these glens have thundered
    And sent their startling echoes o'er the earth.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

=Cornwall-on-the-Hudson.=--This locality N. P. Willis selected as the
most picturesque point on the Hudson. The village lies in a lovely
valley, which Mr. Beach has styled in his able description, as "an
offshoot of the Ramapo, up which the storm-winds of the ocean drive,
laden with the purest and freshest air."

=Idlewild.=--Where Willis spent the last years of his life is a
charming spot and rich with poetic memories. E. P. Roe also chose
Cornwall for his home. Lovers of the Hudson are indebted to Edward
Bok for his realistic sketch of an afternoon visit. The "Idlewild" of
to-day is still green to the memory of the poet. Since Willis' death
the place has passed in turn into various hands, until now it belongs
to a wealthy New York lawyer, who has spent thousands of dollars on
the house and grounds. The old house still stands, and here and there
in the grounds remains a suggestion of the time of Willis. The famous
pine-drive leading to the mansion, along which the greatest literary
lights of the Knickerbocker period passed during its palmy days, still
remains intact, the dense growth of the trees only making the road the
more picturesque. The brook, at which Willis often sat, still runs on
through the grounds as of yore. In the house, everything is remodeled
and remodernized. The room from whose windows Willis was wont to look
over the Hudson, and where he did most of his charming writing, is now
a bedchamber, modern in its every appointment, and suggesting its age
only by the high ceiling and curious mantel. Only a few city blocks
from "Idlewild" is the house where lived E. P. Roe, the author of so
many popular novels, as numerous, almost, in number as the several
hundreds of thousands of circulation which they secured. There are
twenty-three acres to it in all, and, save what was occupied by the
house, every inch of ground was utilized by the novelist in his hobby
for fine fruits and rare flowers. Now nothing remains of the beauty
once so characteristic of the place. For four years the grounds have
missed the care of their creator. Where once were the novelist's
celebrated strawberry beds, are now only grass and weeds. Everything
is grown over, only a few trees remaining as evidence that the grounds
were ever known for their cultivated products. A large board sign
announces the fact that the entire place is for sale.

       * * *

  The river narrows at their proud behest
    And creeps more darkly as it deeper flows,
  And fitful winds swirl through the long defile
    Where the great Highlands keep their stern repose.

  _E.A. Lente._

       * * *

Cornwall has been for many years a favorite resort of the Hudson
Valley and her roofs shelter in the summer season many thousand
people. The road completed in 1876, from Cornwall to West Point, gives
one a pleasant acquaintance with the wooded Highlands. It passes over
the plateau of Cro' Nest and winds down the Cornwall slope of Storm
King. The tourist who sees Cro' Nest and Storm King only from the
river, has but little idea of their extent. Cro' Nest plateau is about
one thousand feet above the parade ground of West Point, and overlooks
it as a rocky balcony. These mountains, with their wonderful lake
system, are, in fact, the "Central Park" of the Hudson. Within a
radius of ten miles are clustered over forty lakes, and we very much
doubt if one person in a thousand ever heard of them. A convenient
map giving the physical geography of this section would be of great
service to the mountain visitor. The Cornwall pier, built by the _New
York, Ontario and Western Railroad_ in 1892 for coal and freight
purposes, will be seen on our left near the Cornwall dock. This
railroad leaves the _West Shore_ at this point and forms a pleasant
tourist route to the beautiful inland villages and resorts of the
State.

       * * *

    A solitary gleam struck on the base of the Highland peak, and
    moved gracefully up its side, until reaching the summit, it stood
    for a minute forming a crown of glory to the sombre pile.

    _James Fenimore Cooper._

       * * *

=Newburgh to Poughkeepsie.=

=Newburgh=, 60 miles from New York. Approaching the city of Newburgh,
we see a building of rough stone, one story high, with steep
roof--known as Washington's Headquarters. For several years prior to,
and during the Revolution, this was the home of Jonathan Hasbrouck,
known far and wide for business integrity and loyalty to liberty. This
house was built by him, apparently, in decades; the oldest part, the
northeast corner, in 1750; the southeast corner, in 1760, and the
remaining half in 1770. It fronted west on the king's highway, now
known as Liberty Street, with a garden and family burial plot to the
east, lying between the house and the river. It was restored as nearly
as possible to its original character on its purchase by the State
in 1849, and it is now the treasure-house of many memories, and of
valuable historic relics. A descriptive catalogue, prepared for
the trustees, under act of May 11, 1874, by a patient and careful
historian, =Dr. E. M. Ruttenber=, will be of service to the visitor and
can be obtained on the grounds. The following facts, condensed from
his admirable historical sketch, are of practical interest:

"=Washington's Headquarters=, or the Hasbrouck house, is situated in
the southeast part of the city, constructed of rough stone, one story
high, fifty-six feet front by forty-six feet in depth, and located on
what was originally Lot No. 2, of the German Patent, with title vested
in Heman (Herman?) Schoneman, a native of the Palatinate of Germany,
who sold, in 1721, to James Alexander, who subsequently sold to
Alexander Colden and Burger Meynders, by whom it was conveyed to
Jonathan Hasbrouck, the grandson of Abraham Hasbrouck, one of the
Huguenot founders of New Paltz. He was a man of marked character; of
fine physique, being six feet and four inches in height; was colonel
of the militia of the district, and in frequent service in guarding
the passes of the Highlands. His occupation was that of a farmer, a
miller, and a merchant. He died in 1780. The first town meeting for
the Precinct of Newburgh was held here on the first Tuesday in April,
1763, when its owner was elected supervisor. Public meetings continued
to be held here for several years. During the early part of the
Revolution, the committee of safety, of the precinct, assembled here;
here military companies were organized, and here the regiment which
Colonel Hasbrouck commanded assembled, to move hence to the defence of
the Highland forts."

       * * *

  Sacred in this mansion hoary,
    'Neath its roof-tree long ago
  Dwelt the father of our glory,
    He whose name appalled the foe.

  _Mary E. Monell._

       * * *

From this brief outline, it will be seen that the building is
singularly associated with the history of the Old as well as of the
New World: with the former through the original grantee of the land,
recalling the wars which devastated the Palatinate and sent its
inhabitants, fugitive and penniless, to other parts of Europe and to
America; through his successor with the Huguenots of France, and,
through the public meetings which assembled here, and especially
through its occupation by Washington, with the struggle for American
independence.

In the spring of 1782 Washington made this building his headquarters,
and remained here until August 18, 1783, on the morning of which day
he took his departure from Newburgh. At this place he passed through
the most trying period of the Revolution: the year of inactivity on
the part of Congress, of distress throughout the country, and of
complaint and discontent in the army, the latter at one time bordering
on revolt among the officers and soldiers.

It was at this place, on the 22d day of May, 1782, that Colonel
Nicola, on behalf of himself and others, proposed that Washington
should become king, for the "national advantage," a proposal that was
received by Washington with "surprise and astonishment," "viewed with
abhorrence," and "reprehended with severity." The temptation which was
thus repelled by Washington, had its origin with that portion of the
officers of the army, who while giving their aid heartily to secure
an independent government, nevertheless believed that that government
should be a monarchy. The rejection of the proposition by Washington
was not the only significant result. The rank and file of the army
rose up against it, and around their camp-fires chanted their purpose
in Billings' song, "No King but God!" From that hour a republic became
the only possible form of government for the enfranchised Colonies.

       * * *

  With silvered locks and eyes grown dim,
    As victory's sun proclaimed the morn,
  He pushed aside the diadem
    With stern rebuke and patriot scorn.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

The inattention of Congress to the payment of the army, during the
succeeding winter, gave rise to an equally important episode in the
history of the war. On the 10th of March, 1783, the first of the
famous "Newburgh Letters" was issued, in which, by implication at
least, the army was advised to revolt. The letter was followed by an
anonymous manuscript notice for a public meeting of officers on
the succeeding Tuesday. Washington was equal to the emergency. He
expressed his disapprobation of the whole proceeding, and with great
wisdom, requested the field officers, with one commissioned officer
from each company, to meet on the Saturday preceding the time
appointed by the anonymous notice. He attended this meeting and
delivered before it one of the most touching and effective addresses
on record. When he closed his remarks, the officers unanimously
resolved "to reject with disdain" the infamous proposition contained
in the anonymous address.

The meeting of officers referred to was held at the New Building or
"Temple" as it was called, in New Windsor, but Washington's address
was written at his headquarters. The "Newburgh Letters," to which it
was a reply, were written by Major John Armstrong, aid-de-camp to
General Gates. The anonymously called meeting was not held. The
motives of its projectors we will not discuss; but its probable
effect, had it been successful, must be considered in connection
with Washington's encomium of the result of the meeting which he had
addressed: "Had this day been wanting, the world had never known the
height to which human greatness is capable of attaining."

       * * *

  Freemen pause! this ground is holy,
    Noble spirits suffered here,
  Tardy Justice, marching slowly,
    Tried their faith from year to year.

  _Mary E. Monell._

       * * *

  Serene and calm in peril's hour,
    An honest man without pretence,
  He stands supreme to teach the power
    And brilliancy of common-sense.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

Notice of the cessation of hostilities was proclaimed to the army
April 19, 1783. It was received with great rejoicings by the troops
at Newburgh, and under Washington's order, was the occasion of
an appropriate celebration. In the evening, signal beacon lights
proclaimed the joyous news to the surrounding country. Thirteen
cannon came pealing up from Fort Putnam, which were followed by a
_feu-de-joie_ rolling along the lines. The mountain sides resounded
and echoed like tremendous peals of thunder, and the flashing from
thousands of fire-arms, in the darkness of the evening, was like unto
vivid flashes of lightning from the clouds. From this time furloughs
were freely granted to soldiers who wished to return to their homes,
and when the army was finally disbanded those absent were discharged
from service without being required to return. That portion of the
army, which remained at Newburgh on guard duty, after the removal of
the main body to West Point in June, were participants here in the
closing scenes of the disbandment, when, on the morning of November
3, 1783, "the proclamation of Congress and the farewell orders of
Washington were read, and the last word of command given." From
Monell's "Handbook of Washington's Headquarters" we also quote a
general description of the house and its appearance when occupied by
the commander-in-chief. "Washington's family consisted of himself, his
wife, and his aid-de-camp, Major Tench Tilghman. The large room, which
is entered from the piazza on the east, known as 'the room with seven
doors and one window,' was used as the dining and sitting-room. The
northeast room was Washington's bedroom and the one adjoining it on
the left was occupied by him as a private office. The family room was
that in the southeast; the kitchen was the southwest room; the parlor
the northwest room. Between the latter and the former was the hall and
staircase and the storeroom, so called for having been used by Colonel
Hasbrouck and subsequently by his widow as a store. The parlor was
mainly reserved for Mrs. Washington and her guests. A Mrs. Hamilton,
whose name frequently appears in Washington's account book, was his
housekeeper, and in the early part of the war made a reputation for
her zeal in his service, which Thacher makes note of and Washington
acknowledges in his reference to an exchange of salt. There was little
room for the accommodation of guests, but it is presumed that the
chambers were reserved for that purpose. Washington's guests, however,
were mainly connected with the army and had quarters elsewhere. Even
Lafayette had rooms at DeGrove's Hotel when a visitor at headquarters.

"The building is now substantially in the condition it was during
Washington's occupation of it. The same massive timbers span the
ceiling; the old fire-place with its wide-open chimney is ready for
the huge back-logs of yore; the seven doors are in their places;
the rays of the morning sun still stream through the one window; no
alteration in form has been made in the old piazza--the adornments on
the walls, if such the ancient hostess had, have alone been changed
for souvenirs of the heroes of the nation's independence. In
presence of these surroundings, it requires but little effort of the
imagination to restore the departed guests. Forgetting not that this
was Washington's private residence, rather than a place for the
transaction of public business, we may, in the old sitting-room
respread the long oaken table, listen to the blessing invoked on the
morning meal, hear the cracking of joints, and the mingled hum of
conversation. The meal dispensed, Mrs. Washington retires to appear at
her flower beds or in her parlor to receive her morning calls. Colfax,
the captain of the life-guard, enters to receive the orders of the
day--perhaps a horse and guard for Washington to visit New Windsor,
or a barge for Fishkill or West Point, is required; or it may be
Washington remains at home and at his writing desk conducts his
correspondence, or dictates orders for army movements. The old
arm-chair, sitting in the corner yonder, is still ready for its former
occupant.

"The dinner hour of five o'clock approaches; the guests of the day
have already arrived. Steuben, the iron drill-master and German
soldier of fortune, converses with Mrs. Washington. He had reduced
the simple marksmen of Bunker Hill to the discipline of the armies
of Europe and tested their efficiency in the din of battle. He has
leisure now, and scarcely knows how to find employment for his active
mind. He is telling his hostess, in broken German-English, of the
whale (it proved to be an eel) he had caught in the river. Hear his
hostess laugh! And that is the voice of Lafayette, relating perhaps
his adventures in escaping from France, or his mishap in attempting
to attend Mrs. Knox's last party. Wayne, of Stony Point; Gates, of
Saratoga; Clinton, the Irish-blooded Governor of New York, and their
compatriots--we may place them all at times beside our _Pater Patriae_
in this old room, and hear amid the mingled hum his voice declare:
'Happy, thrice happy, shall they be pronounced hereafter, who have
contributed anything, who have performed the meanest office in
erecting this stupendous fabric of Freedom and Empire on the broad
basis of independency; who have assisted in protecting the rights of
human nature, and in establishing an asylum for the poor and oppressed
of all nations and religions.'

"In France, some fifty years after the Revolution, Marbois reproduced,
as an entertainment for Lafayette, then an old man, this old
sitting-room and its table scene. From his elegant saloon he conducted
his guests, among whom were several Americans, to the room which he
had prepared. There was a large open fire-place, and plain oaken
floors; the ceiling was supported with large beams and whitewashed;
there were the seven small-sized doors and one window with heavy sash
and small panes of glass. The furniture was plain and unlike any then
in use. Down the centre of the room was an oaken table covered with
dishes of meat and vegetables, decanters and bottles of wine, and
silver mugs and small wine glasses. The whole had something the
appearance of a Dutch kitchen. While the guests were looking around in
surprise at this strange procedure, the host, addressing himself to
them said, 'Do you know where we now are?' Lafayette looked around,
and, as if awakening from a dream, he exclaimed, 'Ah! the seven doors
and one window, and the silver camp goblets such as the Marshals of
France used in my youth. We are at Washington's Headquarters on the
Hudson fifty years ago.'"

       * * *

  One window looking toward the east;
    Seven doors wide-open every side;
  That room revered proclaims at least
    An invitation free and wide.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

    The goodness which characterizes Washington is felt
    by all around him, but the confidence he inspires is
    never familiar; it springs from a profound esteem for
    his virtues and a great opinion of his talents.

    _Marquis de Chastellux._

       * * *

    From these headquarters Washington promulgated his
    memorable order for the cessation of hostilities and
    recalled the fact that its date, April 18th, was the anniversary
    of the battles of Lexington and Concord.

    _Thomas F. Bayard._

       * * *

The Hasbrouck family returned to their old home, made historic for all
time, after the disbandment of the army and remained until it became
the property of the State. On July 4, 1850, the place was formally
dedicated by Major-General Winfield Scott, dedicatory address
delivered by John J. Monell, an ode by Mary E. Monell, and an oration
by Hon. John W. Edmunds. The centennial of the disbanding of the army
was observed here October 18, 1883. After the noonday procession
of 10,000 men in line, three miles in length, with governors and
representative people from almost every State, 150,000 people, "ten
acres" square, gathered in the historic grounds. Senator Bayard, of
Delaware, was chairman of the day. Hon. William M. Evarts was the
orator, and modestly speaking in the third person, Wallace Bruce,
author of this handbook, was the poet. No one there gathered can ever
forget that afternoon of glorious sunlight or the noble pageant. The
great mountains, which had so frequently been the bulwark of liberty
and a place of refuge for our fathers, were all aglow with beauty, as
if, like Horeb's bush, they too would open their lips in praise and
thanksgiving. One of the closing sentences of Senator Evarts' address
is unsurpassed in modern or ancient eloquence: "These rolling years
have shown growth, forever growth, and strength, increasing strength,
and wealth and numbers ever expanding, while intelligence, freedom,
art, culture and religion have pervaded and ennobled all this material
greatness. Wide, however, as is our land and vast our population
to-day, these are not the limits to the name, the fame, the power of
the life and character of Washington. If it could be imagined that
this nation, rent by disastrous feuds, broken in its unity, should
ever present the miserable spectacle of the undefiled garments of his
fame parted among his countrymen, while for the seamless vesture
of his virtue they cast lots--if this unutterable shame, if this
immeasurable crime, should overtake this land and this people, be sure
that no spot in the wide world is inhospitable to his glory, and
no people in it but rejoices in the influence of his power and his
virtue." In his lofty sentences the old heroes seemed to pass again
in review before us, and the daily life of that heroic band, when
Congress sat inactive and careless of its needs until the camp rose in
mutiny, happily checked, however, by the great commander in a single
sentence. It will be remembered that Washington began to read his
manuscript without glasses, but was compelled to stop, and, as he
adjusted them to his eyes, he said, "You see, gentlemen, that I have
not only grown gray, but blind, in your service." It is needless to
say that the "anonymously called" meeting was not held.

  He quelled the half-paid mutineers,
    And bound them closer to the cause;
  His presence turned their wrath to tears,
    Their muttered threats to loud applause.

  The great Republic had its birth
    That hour beneath the army's wing,
  Whose leader taught by native worth
    The man is grander than the king.

       * * *

  We hear the anthem once again,--
    "No king but God!"--to guide our way,
  Like that of old--"Good-will to men"--
    Unto the shrine where freedom lay.

  _Wallace Bruce_.

       * * *

Near at hand, and also plainly seen from the river, is the new Tower
of Victory, fifty-three feet high, costing $67,000. It contains a
life-size statue of Washington, in the act of sheathing his sword,
with bronze figures representing the rifle, the artillery, the line
officer and dragoon service of our country, with a bronze tablet on
the east wall bearing the inscription: "This monument was erected
under the authority of the Congress of the United States, and of
the State of New York, in commemoration of the disbandment, under
proclamation of the Continental Congress, of October 18, 1783, of
the armies, by whose patriotic and military virtue, our national
independence and sovereignty were established." The Belvidere, reached
by a spiral staircase, is capable of holding one hundred persons,
and the view therefrom takes in a wide extent of panoramic beauty.
Newburgh has not only reason to be proud of her historical landmarks
and her beautiful situation, but also of her commercial prosperity.
In olden times, it was a great centre for all the western and
southwestern district, farmers and lumbermen coming from long
distances in the interior. Soon after the Revolution she was made a
village, when there were only two others in the State. Before the days
of the Erie canal, this was the shortest route to Lake Erie, and was
made by stage _via_ Ithaca. With increasing facilities of railway
communication, she has also easily held her own against all commercial
rivals. The _West Shore Railroad_, the _Erie Railway_, the _New York
Central_ and the _New York and New England_ across the river, and
several Hudson river steamers, make her peculiarly central. The city
is favored with beautiful driveways, amid charming country seats.
The New Paltz road passes the site where General Wayne had his
headquarters, also, the "Balm of Gilead tree," which gave the name of
Balmville to the suburban locality. Another road affords a glimpse of
the "Vale of Avoca," named after the well-known glen in Ireland, of
which Tom Moore so sweetly sung. Here, some say, a treacherous attempt
was made on the life of Washington, but it is not generally credited
by critical historians. As the steamer leaves the dock, and we look
back upon the factories and commercial houses along the water front,
crowned by noble streets of residence, with adjoining plateau,
sweeping back in a vast semi-circle as a beautiful framework to
the wide bay, we do not wonder that Hendrick Hudson established a
prophetic record by writing "a very pleasant place to build a town."

[Illustration: WASHINGTON'S HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH]

       * * *

    Washington! Brave without temerity; laborious without
    ambition; generous without prodigality; noble
    without pride; virtuous without severity.

    _Marquis de Chastellux._

       * * *

=Fishkill-on-the-Hudson.=--Directly opposite Newburgh, one mile north
of Denning's Point (formerly the eastern dock of the Newburgh ferry),
rises on a pleasant slope, the newer Fishkill of this region. A little
more than a mile from the landing, is the manufacturing village
of Matteawan, connected by an electric railroad. Old Fishkill, or
Fishkill Village, is about four miles inland, charmingly located,
under the slope of the Fishkill range. This was once the largest
village in Dutchess county, and was chosen for its secure position
above the Highlands, as the place to which "should be removed the
treasury and archives of the State, also, as the spot for holding the
subsequent sessions of the Provincial Conventions," after they were
driven from New York. A historical sketch of the town, by T. Van Wyck
Brinkerhoff, presents many things of interest. "Its history, anterior
to 1682, belongs to the red men of the valley, and, more than any
other spot, this was the home of their priests. Here they performed
their incantations and administered at their altars." According to
Broadhead, "It would seem that the neighboring Indians esteemed
the peltries from Fishkill as charmed by the incantations of the
aboriginal enchanters who lived along its banks, and the beautiful
scenery in which those ancient priests of the Highlands dwelt, is
thus invested with new poetic associations." Dunlap speaks of them as
"occupying the Highlands, called by them Kittatenny Mountains. Their
principal settlement, designated Wiccapee, was situated in the
vicinity of Anthony's Nose. Here too, lived the Wappingers, a war-like
and brave tribe, extending themselves along the Matteawan, along
the Wappingers Kill and tributaries, along the Hudson, and to the
northward, across the river into Ulster County. These and other tribes
to the south, west and north, were parts of and tributaries to the
great Iroquois confederation--the marvel for all time to come of a
system of government so wise and politic, and for men so eloquent and
daring. The Wappingers took part in the Dutch and Indian wars of 1643
and 1663, led on by their war chiefs, Wapperonk and Aepjen. A few
Indian names are still remaining, and a few traces of their history
still left standing. The name Matteawan is Indian, signifying 'Good
Beaver Grounds,' and the name Wappinger still speaks of those who
once owned the soil along the Hudson. Their name for the stream was
Mawanassigh, or Mawenawasigh. Wiccapee and Shenondoah are also Indian
names of places in Fishkill Hook, and East Fishkill, and Apoquague,
still surviving as the name of a country postoffice, was the Indian
style of what is now called Silver Lake, signifying 'round pond.' In
Fishkill Hook until quite recently, there were traces of their burial
grounds, and many apple and pear trees are still left standing, set
there by the hands of the red man before the country had been occupied
by Europeans."

       * * *

  For here amid these hills he once kept court--
  He who his country's eagle taught to soar
  And fired those stars which shine o'er every shore.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

To return to Brinkerhoff, "The first purchase of land in the county
of Dutchess, was made in the town of Fishkill. On the 8th day
of February, 1682, a license was given by Thomas Dongan,
Commander-in-chief of the Province of New York, to Francis Rombout and
Gulian Ver Planck, to purchase a tract of land from the Indians. Under
this license, they bought, on the 8th day of August, 1683, of the
Wappinger Indians, all their right, title and interest to a certain
large tract of land, afterward known as the Rombout precinct. Gulian
Ver Planck died before the English patent was issued by Governor
Dongan; Stephanus Van Cortland was then joined in it with Rombout,
and Jacobus Kipp substituted as the representative of the children of
Gulian Ver Planck. On the 17th day of October, 1685, letters patent,
under the broad seal of the Province of New York, were granted by King
James the Second, and the parties to whom these letters patent were
granted, became from that time the undisputed proprietors of the soil.
There were 76,000 acres of these lands lying in Fishkill, and other
towns taken from the patent, and 9,000 acres lying in the limits of
the town of Poughkeepsie. Besides paying the natives, as a further
consideration for the privilege of their license, they were to pay
the commander-in-chief, Thomas Dongan, six bushels of good and
merchantable winter wheat every year." In the Book of Patents, at
Albany, vol. 5, page 72, will be found the deed, of special interest
to the historian and antiquarian.

       * * *

    It was a dainty day, and it grew more dainty towards
    its close as the lights and shadows stretched athwart
    our Highland landscape.

    _Susan Warner._

       * * *

"After the evacuation of New York, in the fall of 1776, and the
immediate loss of the seaboard, with Long Island and part of New
Jersey, Fishkill was at once crowded with refugees, as they were then
called, who sought, by banishing themselves from their homes on Long
Island and New York, to escape imprisonment and find safety here. The
interior army route to Boston passed through this place. Army stores,
workshops, ammunition, etc., were established and deposited here." The
Marquis De Chastellux, in his travels in North America, says: "This
town, in which there are not more than fifty houses in the space of
two miles, has been long the principal depot of the American army.
It is there they have placed their magazines, their hospitals, their
workshops, etc., but all of these form a town in themselves, composed
of handsome large barracks, built in the woods at the foot of the
mountains: for the American army, like the Romans in many respects,
have hardly any other winter quarters than wooden towns, or barricaded
camps, which may be compared to the 'hiemalia' of the Romans." These
barracks were situated on the level plateau between the residence of
Mr. Cotheal and the mountains. Portions of these grounds were no
doubt then covered with timber. Guarding the approach from the south,
stockades and fortifications were erected on commanding positions, and
regularly manned by detachments from the camp.

       * * *

  Unto him and them all owing
    Peace as stable as our hills,
  Plenty like yon river flowing
    To the sea from thousand rills.

  _Mary E. Monell._

       * * *

"Upon one of these hills, rising out of this mountain pass-way, very
distinct lines of earthworks are yet apparent. Near the residence of
Mr. Sidney E. Van Wyck, by the large black-walnut trees, and east
of the road near the base of the mountain, was the soldiers' burial
ground. Many a poor patriot soldier's bones lie mouldering there; and
if we did but know how many, we would be startled at the number, for
this almost unknown and unnoticed burial ground holds not a few, but
hundreds of those who gave their lives for the cause of American
independence. Some fifteen years ago, an old lady who had lived near
the village until after she had grown to womanhood, told the writer
that after the battle of White Plains she went with her father through
the streets of Fishkill, and in places between the Dutch and Episcopal
churches, the dead were piled up like cord-wood. Those who died from
wounds in battle or from sickness in hospital were buried there. Many
of these were State militiamen, and it seems no more than just that
the State should make an appropriation to erect a suitable monument
over this spot. Rather than thus remain for another century, if a
rough granite boulder were rolled down from the mountain side and
inscribed: 'To the unknown and unnumbered dead of the American
Revolution,' that rough unhewn stone would tell to the stranger and
the passer-by, more to the praise and fame of our native town than
any of us shall be able to add to it by works of our own; for it is
doubtful whether any spot in the State has as many of the buried dead
of the Revolution as this quiet burial yard in our old town!" Here
also on June 2, 1883, was observed "The Fishkill Centennial," and
few of our centennials have been celebrated amid objects of greater
revolutionary interest. Near at hand, to quote from the official
report of the proceedings, is "Denning's Point where Washington
frequently, while waiting, tied his horses under those magnificent
'Washington oaks,' as he passed backward and forward from New Windsor
and Newburgh to Fishkill. Near by is the Verplanck House, Baron
Steuben's old headquarters. On Spy Hill and Continental Hill troops
were quartered. At Matteawan Sackett lived, and there is the Teller
House built by Madame Brett, where officers frequently resorted, and
there Yates dwelt when he presided over the legislative body while it
held its sessions in Fishkill, that had much to do with forming our
first State Constitution. Baron Steuben was for a while in the old
Scofield House at Glenham. In Fishkill are those renowned old churches
where legislative sittings were held, which were also used as
hospitals for the sick, and one of which is otherwise known as being
the place where Enoch Crosby, the spy, was imprisoned, and from which
he escaped. Near at hand the Wharton House (Van Wyck House), forever
associated with him, and made famous by Cooper's 'Spy.' In the
Brinckerhoff House above, Lafayette was dangerously ill with a fever,
and there, at Swartwoutville, Washington was often a visitor. Whenever
Washington was at Fishkill he made Colonel Brinckerhoff's his
headquarters. He occupied the bedroom back of the parlor, which
remains the same 'excepting a door that opens into the hall, which has
been cut through.' It is an old-fashioned house built of stone, with
the date 1738 on one of its gables." With the story of Fishkill we
close the largest page relating to our revolutionary heroes, and leave
behind us the Old Beacon Mountains which forever sentinel and proclaim
their glory.

       * * *

    No prouder sentinel of glory than the old Beacon
    Mountain whose watch-fire guarded the valley and spoke
    its rallying message to the Catskills and Berkshires and
    the very foothills of the Green Mountains.

    _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

    The sun touched mountains in some places were of
    a bright orange and the shadows between them deep
    neutral tint or blue. And the river apparently had
    stopped running to reflect.

    _Susan Warner._

       * * *

=Low Point=, or Carthage, is a small village on the east bank, about
four miles north of Fishkill. It was called by the early inhabitants
Low Point, as New Hamburgh, two miles north, was called High Point.
Opposite Carthage is Roseton, once known as Middlehope, and above this
we see the residence of Bancroft Davis and the Armstrong Mansion. We
now behold on the west bank a large flat rock, covered with cedars,
recently marked by a lighthouse, the--

=Duyvel's Dans Kammer.=--Here Hendrick Hudson, in his voyage up the
river, witnessed an Indian pow-wow--the first recorded fireworks in a
country which has since delighted in rockets and pyrotechnic displays.
Here, too, in later years, tradition relates the sad fate of a wedding
party. It seems that a Mr. Hans Hansen and a Miss Kathrina Van
Voorman, with a few friends, were returning from Albany, and
disregarding the old Indian prophecy, were all slain:--

  "For none that visit the Indian's den
  Return again to the haunts of men.
  The knife is their doom! O sad is their lot!
  Beware, beware of the blood-stained spot!"

Some years ago this spot was also searched for the buried treasures
of Captain Kidd, and we know of one river pilot who still dreams
semi-yearly of there finding countless chests of gold.

Two miles above, on the east side, we pass New Hamburgh, at the mouth
of =Wappingers Creek=. The name Wappinger had its origin from Wabun,
east, and Acki, land. This tribe, a sub-tribe of the Mahicans, held
the east bank of the river, from Manhattan to Roeliffe Jansen's Creek,
which empties into the Hudson near Livingston, a few miles south of
Catskill Station on the _Hudson River Railroad_. Passing Hampton
Point we see Marlborough, the head-centre of a large fruit industry,
delightfully located in the sheltered pass of the Maunekill. On the
east bank will be noticed several fine residences: "Uplands," "High
Cliff," "Cedars," and "Netherwood." Milton is now at hand on the west
bank, with its cosy landing and _West Shore Railroad_ station. This
pleasant village was one of the loved spots of J. G. Holland, and the
home of Mary Hallock Foote, until a modern "Hiawatha" took our Hudson
"Minnehaha" to far away western mountains.

       * * *

  The tulip tree majestic stirs
    Far down the water's marge beside,
  And now awake the nearer firs,
    And toss their ample branches wide.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

=Springbrook=, opposite Milton, a place of historic interest, near the
river bank, was bought by Theophilus Anthony before the Revolution.
Some of the links of the famous chain in the Highlands were forged
here in 1777. When the British ships ascended the river the family
fled to the woods, all but an old colored servant woman who wisely
furnished the soldiers a good dinner and got thereby their good will
to save the house. The old Flour Mill, however, was burned which stood
on the same site as the present Springbrook Mill. Theophilus Anthony's
only daughter married Thomas Gill after the Revolution, and from that
time the property has been in the Gill family. Few places in the
Hudson Valley have such ancient and continuous family history.

=Locust Grove=, with square central tower and open outlook, residence
of the late Prof. S. F. B. Morse, inventor of the telegraph, is seen on
the west bank; also the "Lookout," once known as Mine Hill, now a part
of Poughkeepsie cemetery, with charming driveway to the wooded point
where the visitor can see from his carriage one of the finest views
of the Hudson. The completion of this drive is largely due to the
enterprise of the late Mr. George Corlies, who did much to make
Poughkeepsie beautiful. The view from this "Lookout" takes in the
river for ten miles to the south, and reaches on the north to the
Catskills. In a ramble with Mr. Corlies over Lookout Point, he told
the writer that it was originally the purpose of Matthew Vassar to
erect a monument on Pollopel's Island to Hendrick Hudson. Mr. Corlies
suggested this point as the most commanding site. Mr. Vassar visited
it, and concluded to place the monument here. He published an article
in the Poughkeepsie papers to this effect, and, meeting Mr. Corlies
one week afterwards, said, "Not one person in the city of Poughkeepsie
has referred to my monument. I have decided to build a college for
women, where they can learn what is useful, practical and sensible."
It is interesting to note the fountain-idea of the first woman's
college in the world, as it took form and shape in the mind of its
founder.

[Illustration: POUGHKEEPSIE BRIDGE]

[Illustration: TROPHY POINT, WEST POINT]

[Illustration: OLD CRO' NEST AND STORM KING]

[Illustration: POLLIPEL'S ISLAND AND MOUNT TAURUS]

[Illustration: THE CATSKILLS FROM THE HUDSON]

[Illustration: NORTHERN GATE OF HIGHLANDS]

       * * *

  And from their leaguering legions thick and vast
  The galling hail-shot in fierce volley falls,
  While quick, from cloud to cloud, darts o'er the levin
  The flash that fires the batteries of heaven!

  _Knickerbocker Magazine._

       * * *

[Illustration: MORNING VIEW AT BLUE POINT.]

We now see =Blue Point=, on the west bank; and, in every direction,
enjoy the finest views. The scenery seems to stand, in character,
between the sublimity of the Highlands and the tranquil, dreamy repose
of the Tappan Zee. It is said that under the shadow of these hills was
the favorite anchorage of--

=The Storm Ship=, one of our oldest and most reliable legends. The
story runs somewhat as follows: Years ago, when New York was a
village--a mere cluster of houses on the point now known as the
Battery--when the Bowery was the farm of Peter Stuyvesant, and the Old
Dutch Church on Nassau Street (which also long since disappeared),
was considered the country--when communication with the old world was
semi-yearly instead of semi-weekly or daily--say two hundred years
ago--the whole town one evening was put into great commotion by the
fact that a ship was coming up the bay.

       * * *

  See you beneath yon sky so dark
  Fast gliding along a gloomy bark:--
  By skeleton shapes her sails are furled,
  And the hand that steers is not of this world.

  _Legend of the Storm Ship._

       * * *

She approached the Battery within hailing distance, and then, sailing
against both wind and tide, turned aside and passed up the Hudson.
Week after week and month after month elapsed, but she never returned;
and whenever a storm came down on Haverstraw Bay or Tappan Zee, it
is said that she could be seen careening over the waste; and, in the
midst of the turmoil, you could hear the captain giving orders, in
_good Low Dutch_; but when the weather was pleasant, her favorite
anchorage was among the shadows of the picturesque hills, on the
eastern bank, a few miles above the Highlands. It was thought by some
to be Hendrick Hudson and his crew of the "Half Moon," who, it was
well known, had once run aground in the upper part of the river,
seeking a northwest passage to China; and people who live in this
vicinity still insist that under the calm harvest moon and the
pleasant nights of September, they see her under the bluff of Blue
Point, all in deep shadow, save her topsails glittering in the
moonlight.

=Poughkeepsie=, 74 miles from New York, is now at hand, Queen City
of the Hudson, with name, derived from the Indian word Apokeepsing,
signifying "safe harbor." Near the landing a bold headland juts out
into the river, known as Kaal Rock, and no doubt this sheltering
rock was a safe harbor in days of birch canoes. It has been recently
claimed that the word signifies "muddy pond," which is neither true,
appropriate or poetic. Poughkeepsie does not propose to give up
her old-time "harbor name," particularly as it has been recently
discovered that the name "Kipsie" was also given by the Indians to a
"safe harbor" near the Battery on Manhattan Island. It is said that
there are over forty different ways of spelling Poughkeepsie, and
every year the postoffice record gives a new one. The first house was
built in 1702 by a Mr. Van Kleeck. The State legislature had a session
here in 1777 or 1778, when New York was held by the British and after
Kingston had been burned by Vaughan.

       * * *

  On the crest of the waves, a something that glides
  Before the stiff breeze, and gracefully rides
  On the inflowing tide majestic and free
  A huge and mysterious bird of the sea.

  _Irving Bruce._

       * * *

Ten years later, the State convention also met here for ratification
of the Federal Constitution. The town has a beautiful location, and is
justly regarded the finest residence city on the river. It is not
only midway between New York and Albany, but also midway between the
Highlands and the Catskills, commanding a view of the mountain portals
on the south and the mountain overlook on the north--the Gibraltar of
revolutionary fame and the dreamland of Rip Van Winkle.

       * * *

  The azure heaven is filled with smiles,
  The water lisping at my feet
  From weary thought my heart beguiles.

  _Henry Abbey._

       * * *

The well known poet and _litterateur_, Joel Benton, who divides his
residence between New York and Poughkeepsie, in a recent article,
"The Midway City of the Hudson," written for the _Poughkeepsie Sunday
Courier_, says:

"Poughkeepsie as a township was incorporated in 1788. The village
bearing the name was formed in 1799 (incorporated as a city in 1854),
and soon became the center of a large trade running in long lines east
and west from the river. Dutchess County had at this time but a sparse
population. There was a post-road from New York to Albany; but the
building of the Dutchess Turnpike from Poughkeepsie to Sharon, Conn.,
connecting with one from that place to Litchfield, which took place
in 1808, was a capital event in its history. This made a considerable
strip of western Connecticut tributary to Poughkeepsie's trade.

"Over the turnpike went four-horse Concord stages, with berailed top
and slanting boot in the rear for trunks and other baggage. Each one
had the tin horn of the driver; and it was difficult to tell upon
which the driver most prided himself--the power to fill that thrilling
instrument, or his deft handling of the ponderous whip and multiplied
reins. Travelers to Hartford and Boston went over this route; and an
east and west through and way mail was a part of the burden. A sort of
overland express and freight line, styled the Market Wagon, ran in
and out of the town from several directions. One or more of these
conveyances started from as far east as the Housatonic River, and they
frequently crowded passengers in amongst their motley wares.

"Speaking of the stage-driver's horn recalls the fact that when the
steamboat arrived--which was so solitary an institution that for some
time it was distinctly called 'The Steamboat'--the tin horn did duty
also for it. When it was seen in the distance, either Albanyward or in
the New York direction, a boy went through the village blowing a horn
to arouse those who wished to embark on it. It is said the expectant
passengers had ample time, after the horn was sounded, to make their
toilets, run down to the river (or walk down) and take passage on it.

"In colonial days few were the people here; but they were a bright and
stirring handful. It seems as if every man counted as ten. The De's
and the Vans, the Livingstons, the Schuylers, the Montgomerys and ever
so many more of the Hudson River Valley settlers are still making
their impress upon the country. I suppose it need not now be counted
strange that the strong mixture of Dutch and English settlers, with a
few Huguenots, which finally made Dutchess county, were not a little
divided between Tory and Whig inclinations. Around Poughkeepsie,
and in its allied towns stretching between the Hudson River and the
Connecticut line, there was much strife. Gov. George Clinton in his
day ruled in the midst of much tumult and turbulence; but he held the
reins with vigor, in spite of kidnappers or critics. When the British
burned Kingston he prorogued the legislature to Poughkeepsie, which
still served as a 'safe harbor.' As the resolution progressed the Tory
faction was weakened, either by suppression or surrender.

"It was in the Poughkeepsie Court House that, by _one_ vote, after a
Homeric battle, the colony of New York consented to become a part of
the American republic, which consent was practically necessary to its
existence.

"How large a part two small incidents played here towards the result of
nationality. That single vote was one, and the news by express from
Richmond, announcing Virginia's previous ratification--and added
stimulus to the vote--was the other. Poughkeepsie honored in May,
1824, the arrival of Lafayette, and dined him, besides exchanging
speeches with him, both at the Forbus House, on Market Street, very
nearly where the Nelson House now stands, and at the Poughkeepsie
Hotel. It was one of Poughkeepsie's great days when he came. Daniel
Webster has spoken in her court house; and Henry Clay, in 1844, when a
presidential candidate, stopped for a reception. And it is said that,
by a mere accident, she just missed contributing a name to the list of
presidents of the United States. The omitted candidate was Nathaniel
P. Talmadge. He could have had the vice-presidential candidacy, the
story goes, in 1840, but would not take it. If he had accepted it, he
would have gone into history not merely as United States senator
from New York and afterwards Governor of Wisconsin territory, but as
president in John Tyler's place.

"In 1844, the New York State Fair was held here somewhere east of what
is now Hooker Avenue. It was an occasion thought important enough then
to be pictured and reported in the London _Illustrated News_. Two
years after the telegraph wires were put up in this city, before they
had yet reached the city of New York. Considering the fact that Prof.
S. F. B. Morse, the telegraph inventor, had his residence here, this
incident was not wholly inappropriate.

"The advent in 1849 of the _Hudson River Railroad_, which was an
enterprise in its day of startling courage and magnitude, constituted
a special epoch in the history of Poughkeepsie and the Hudson River
towns. Men of middle age here well remember the hostility and ridicule
the project occasioned when it was first broached. Some said no
railroad ever _could_ be built on the river's edge; and, if you
should build one, the enormous expense incurred would make it forever
unprofitable. It seemed then the height of Quixotism to lay an
expensive track where the river offered a free way to all. Property
holders, whose property was to be greatly benefited, fought the
railroad company with unusual spirit and persistence. But the railroad
came, nevertheless, and needs no advocate or apologist to-day. There
is no one now living here who would ask its removal, any more than he
would ask the removal of the Hudson River itself."

       * * *

  And lo! the Catskills print the distant sky,
    And o'er their airy tops the faint clouds driven,
  So softly blending, that the cheated eye
    Forgets or which is earth or which is heaven.

  _Theodore S. Fay_.

       * * *

  Mountains on mountains in the distance rise,
  Like clouds along the far horizon's verge;
  Their misty summits mingling with the skies,
  Till earth and heaven seem blended into one.

  _Bayard Taylor._

       * * *

Poughkeepsie has been known for more than half a century as the City
of Schools. The Parthenon-like structure which crowns College Hill was
prophetic of a still grander and more widely known institution, the
first in the world devoted to higher culture for women,--

=Vassar College.=--This institution, founded by Matthew Vassar, and
situated two miles east of the city, maintains its prestige not only
as the first woman's college in point of time, but also first in
excellence and influence. The grounds are beautiful and graced by
noble buildings which have been erected year by year to meet the
continued demands of its patrons. The college is not seen from the
river but is of easy access by trolley from the steamboat landing.

=Eastman College= is also one of the fixed and solid institutions
of Poughkeepsie, located in the very heart of the city. It has
accomplished good work in preparing young men for business, and has
made Poughkeepsie a familiar word in every household throughout the
land. It was fortunate for the city that the energetic founder of this
college selected the central point of the Hudson as the place of all
others most suited for his enterprise, and equally fortunate for the
thousands of young men who yearly graduate from this institution,
as the city is charmingly located and set like a picture amid
picturesque scenery.

Among many successful public institutions of Poughkeepsie are the
Vassar Hospital, the Vassar Old Men's Home, the Old Ladies' Home, the
State Hospital and the Vassar Institute of Arts and Sciences.

       * * *

    I went three times up the Hudson; and if I lived in
    New York should be tempted to ascend it three times a
    week during the summer.

    _Harriet Martineau._

       * * *

The opera house is one of the pleasantest in the country and received
a high comment, still remembered, from Joseph Jefferson, for its
perfect acoustic quality. The armory, the Adriance Memorial Library to
the memory of Mr. and Mrs. John P. Adriance, and the historic Clinton
House on Main Street purchased in 1898 by the Daughters of the
Revolution, also claim the attention of the visitor. Several factories
are here located, the best known being that of Adriance, Platt & Co.,
whose Buckeye mowers and reapers have been awarded the highest honors
in Germany, Holland, France, Belgium, Sweden, Norway, Italy, Russia,
Switzerland, and the United States, and are sold in every part of
the civilized globe. The Phoenix Horseshoe Co., the Knitting-Goods
Establishment, and various shoe, shirt and silk thread factories
contribute to the material prosperity of the town. The drives about
Poughkeepsie are delightful. Perhaps the best known in the United
States is the Hyde Park road, six miles in extent, with many palatial
homes and charming pictures of park and river scenery. This is a part
of the Old Post Road and reminds one by its perfect finish of the
roadways of England. Returning one can take a road to the left leading
by and up to

=College Hill=, 365 feet in height, commanding a wide and extensive
prospect. The city lies below us, fully embowered as in a wooded park.
To the east the vision extends to the mountain boundaries of Dutchess
County, and to the north we have a view of the Catskills marshalled as
we have seen them a thousand times in sunset beauty along the horizon.
This property, once owned by Senator Morgan and his heirs, was happily
purchased by William Smith of Poughkeepsie, and given to the city as a
public park. There is great opportunity here to make this a thing of
beauty and a joy forever, for there are few views on the Hudson,
and none from any hill of its height, that surpass it in extent and
variety. The city reservoir lies to the north, about one hundred feet
down the slope of College Hill.

       * * *

  My heart is on the hills. The shades
    Of night are on my brow;
  Ye pleasant haunts and quiet glades,
    My soul is with you now!

  _Robert C. Sands._

       * * *

The South Drive, a part of the Old Post Road, passes the gateway of
the beautiful rural cemetery, Locust Grove and many delightful homes.
Another interesting drive from Poughkeepsie is to Lake Mohonk and
Minnewaska, well-known resorts across the Hudson, in the heart of the
Shawangunk (pronounced Shongum) Mountains, also reached by railway
or stages via New Paltz. There are also many extended drives to
the interior of the county recommended to the traveler who makes
Poughkeepsie for a time his central point; chief among these, Chestnut
Ridge, formerly the home of the historian Benson J. Lossing, lying
amid the hill country of eastern Dutchess. Its mean altitude is about
1,100 feet above tide water, a fragment of the Blue Ridge branch of
the Appalachian chain of mountains, cleft by the Hudson at West Point,
stretching away to the Berkshire Hills. It is also easy of access by
the _Harlem Railroad_ from New York to Dover Plains with three miles
of carriage drive from that point. The outlook from the ridge is
magnificent; a sweep of eighty miles from the Highlands to the
Helderbergs, with the entire range of the Shawangunk and the
Catskills. Mr. Lossing once said that his family of nine persons had
required during sixteen years' residence on Chestnut Ridge, only ten
dollars' worth of medical attendance. Previous to 1868 he had resided
in Poughkeepsie, and throughout his life his form was a familiar one
in her streets.

       * * *

  Thy waves are old companions, I shall see
  A well-remembered form in each old tree
  And hear a voice long-loved in thy wild minstrelsy.

  _Joseph Rodman Drake._

       * * *

=The Dover Stone Church=, just west of Dover Plains Village, is also
well worth a visit. Here a small stream has worn out a remarkable
cavern in the rocks forming a gothic arch for entrance. It lies in a
wooded gorge within easy walk from the village. Many years ago the
writer of this handbook paid it an afternoon visit, and the picture
has remained impressed with wonderful vividness. The archway opens
into a solid rock, and a stream of water issues from the threshold. On
entering the visitor is confronted by a great boulder, resembling an
old-fashioned New England pulpit, reaching half way to the ceiling.
The walls are almost perfectly arched, and garnished here and there
with green moss and white lichen. A rift in the rocks extends the
whole length of the chapel, over which trees hang their green foliage,
which, ever rustling and trembling, form a trellis-work with the blue
sky, while the spray rising from behind the rock-worn altar seems like
the sprinkling of holy incense. After all these years I still hear the
voice of those dashing waters and dream again, as I did that day, of
the brook of Cherith where ravens fed the prophet of old. It is said
by Lossing, in his booklet on the Dover Stone Church, that Sacassas,
the mighty sachem of the Pequoids and emperor over many tribes between
the Thames and the Hudson River, was compelled after a disastrous
battle which annihilated his warriors, to fly for safety, and, driven
from point to point, he at last found refuge in this cave, where
undiscovered he subsisted for a few days on berries, until at last he
made his way through the territory of his enemies, the Mahicans, to
the land of the Mohawks.

       * * *

  Tell me, where'er thy silver bark be steering,
    Bright Dian floating by fair Persian lands,
  Tell if thou visited, thou heavenly rover,
   A lovelier stream than this the wide world over.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

=Poughkeepsie to Kingston.=

Leaving the Poughkeepsie dock the steamer approaches the Poughkeepsie
Bridge which, from Blue Point and miles below, has seemed to the
traveler like a delicate bit of lace-work athwart the landscape,
or like an old-fashioned "valance" which used to hang from Dutch
bedsteads in the Hudson River farm houses. This great cantilever
structure was begun in 1873, but abandoned for several years. The work
was resumed in 1886 just in time to save the charter, and was finished
by the Union Bridge Company in less than three years. The bridge is
12,608 feet in length (or about two miles and a half), the track being
212 feet above the water with 165 feet clear above the tide in the
centre span. The breadth of the river at this point is 3,094 feet. The
bridge originally cost over three million dollars and much more has
been annually spent in necessary improvements. It not only affords a
delightful passenger route between Philadelphia and Boston, but also
brings the coal centres of Pennsylvania to the very threshold of New
England. Two railroads from the east centre here, and what was once
considered an idle dream, although bringing personal loss to many
stockholders, has been of material advantage to the city.

As the steamer passes under the bridge the traveler will see on the
left Highland station (_West Shore Railroad_) and above this the old
landing of New Paltz. A well traveled road winds from the ferry and
the station, up a narrow defile by the side of a dashing stream,
broken here and there in waterfalls, to Highland Village, New Paltz
and Lake Mohonk. _The Bridge and Trolley Line_ from Poughkeepsie make
a most delightful excursion to New Paltz, on the Wallkill, seat of one
of the State normal colleges.

       * * *

  My thoughts go back to thee, oh lovely lake,
  Lake of the Sky Top! as thy beauties break
  Upon the traveller of thy mountain road,
  While sunset gilds thee, vision never fairer glowed!

  _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

Prominent among many pleasant residences above Poughkeepsie are:
Mrs. F. J. Allen's of New York, Mrs. John F. Winslow's, Mrs. Thomas
Newbold's, J. Roosevelt's and Archie Rogers'. The large red buildings
above the Poughkeepsie water works are the Hudson River State
Hospital. Passing Crum Elbow Point on the left and the Sisters of the
White Cross Orphan Asylum, we see

=Hyde Park=, 80 miles from New York, on the east bank, named some say,
in honor of Lady Ann Hyde; according to others, after Sir Edward Hyde,
one of the early British Governors of the colony. The first prominent
place above Hyde Park, is Frederick W. Vanderbilt's, with Corinthian
columns; and above this "Placentia," once the home of James K.
Paulding.

Immediately opposite "Placentia," at West Park on the west bank, is
the home of John Burroughs, our sweetest essayist, the nineteenth
century's "White of Selborne." Judge Barnard of Poughkeepsie, once
said to the author of this handbook, "The best writer America has
produced after Hawthorne is John Burroughs; I wish I could see him."
It so happened that there had been an important "bank" suit a day or
two previous in Poughkeepsie which was tried before the judge in which
Mr. Burroughs had appeared as an important witness. The judge was
reminded of this fact when he remarked with a few emphatic words, the
absence of which seems to materially weaken the sentence: "Was that
Burroughs? Well, well, I wish I had known it."

       * * *

  How soothing is this solitude
  With nature in her wildest mood,
  Where Hudson deep, majestic, wide,
  Pours to the sea his monarch tide.

  _William Wilson._

       * * *

=Mount Hymettus=, overlooking West Park, so named by "the author and
naturalist," has indeed been to him a successful hunting-ground for
bees and wild honey, and will be long remembered for sweeter stores of
honey encombed and presented in enduring type. Washington Irving says
of the early poets of Britain that "a spray could not tremble in the
breeze, or a leaf rustle to the ground, that was not seen by these
delicate observers and wrought up into some beautiful morality." So
John Burroughs has studied the Hudson in all its moods, knowing well
that it is not to be wooed and won in a single day. How clear this is
seen in his articles on "Our River":

"Rivers are as various in their forms as forest trees. The Mississippi
is like an oak with enormous branches. What a branch is the Red River,
the Arkansas, the Ohio, the Missouri! The Hudson is like the pine
or poplar--mainly trunk. From New York to Albany there is only an
inconsiderable limb or two, and but few gnarls and excrescences. Cut
off the Rondout, the Esopus, the Catskill and two or three similar
tributaries on the east side, and only some twigs remain. There
are some crooked places, it is true, but, on the whole, the Hudson
presents a fine, symmetrical shaft that would be hard to match in any
river in the world. Among our own water-courses it stands preeminent.
The Columbia--called by Major Winthrop the Achilles of rivers--is a
more haughty and impetuous stream; the Mississippi is, of course,
vastly larger and longer; the St. Lawrence would carry the Hudson as
a trophy in his belt and hardly know the difference; yet our river is
doubtless the most beautiful of them all. It pleases like a mountain
lake. It has all the sweetness and placidity that go with such bodies
of water, on the one hand, and all their bold and rugged scenery on
the other. In summer, a passage up or down its course in one of the
day steamers is as near an idyl of travel as can be had, perhaps,
anywhere in the world. Then its permanent and uniform volume, its
fullness and equipoise at all seasons, and its gently-flowing currents
give it further the character of a lake, or of the sea itself. Of
the Hudson it may be said that it is a very large river for its
size,--that is for the quantity of water it discharges into the sea.
Its watershed is comparatively small--less, I think, than that of the
Connecticut. It is a huge trough with a very slight incline, through
which the current moves very slowly, and which would fill from the sea
were its supplies from the mountains cut off. Its fall from Albany to
the bay is only about five feet. Any object upon it, drifting with the
current, progresses southward no more than eight miles in twenty-four
hours. The ebb-tide will carry it about twelve miles and the flood set
it back from seven to nine. A drop of water at Albany, therefore, will
be nearly three weeks in reaching New York, though it will get pretty
well pickled some days earlier. Some rivers by their volume and
impetuosity penetrate the sea, but here the sea is the aggressor, and
sometimes meets the mountain water nearly half way. This fact was
illustrated a couple of years ago, when the basin of the Hudson was
visited by one of the most severe droughts ever known in this part of
the State. In the early winter after the river was frozen over above
Poughkeepsie, it was discovered that immense numbers of fish were
retreating up stream before the slow encroachment of salt water. There
was a general exodus of the finny tribes from the whole lower part of
the river; it was like the spring and fall migration of the birds, or
the fleeing of the population of a district before some approaching
danger: vast swarms of cat-fish, white and yellow perch and striped
bass were _en route_ for the fresh water farther north. When the
people along shore made the discovery, they turned out as they do in
the rural districts when the pigeons appear, and, with small gill-nets
let down through holes in the ice, captured them in fabulous numbers.
On the heels of the retreating perch and cat-fish came the denizens of
the salt water, and codfish were taken ninety miles above New York.
When the February thaw came and brought up the volume of fresh water
again, the sea brine was beaten back, and the fish, what were left of
them, resumed their old feeding-grounds.

       * * *

    Still on the Half-Moon glides: before her rise swarms
    of quick water fowl, and from her prow the sturgeon
    leaps, and falls with echoing splash.

    _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

  Beneath--the river with its tranquil flood,
  Around--the breezes of the morning, scented
  With odors from the wood.

  _William Allen Butler._

       * * *

"It is this character of the Hudson, this encroachment of the sea upon
it, on account of the subsidence of the Atlantic coast, that led
Professor Newberry to speak of it as a drowned river. We have heard
of drowned lands, but here is a river overflowed and submerged in the
same manner. It is quite certain, however, that this has not always
been the character of the Hudson. Its great trough bears evidence
of having been worn to its present dimensions by much swifter and
stronger currents than those that course through it now. To this
gradual subsidence in connection with the great changes wrought by the
huge glacier that crept down from the north during what is called the
ice period, is owing the character and aspects of the Hudson as we see
and know them. The Mohawk Valley was filled up by the drift, the Great
Lakes scooped out, and an opening for their pent-up waters found
through what is now the St. Lawrence. The trough of the Hudson was
also partially filled and has remained so to the present day. There
is, perhaps, no point in the river where the mud and clay are not from
two to three times as deep as the water. That ancient and grander
Hudson lies back of us several hundred thousand years--perhaps more,
for a million years are but as one tick of the time-piece of the Lord;
yet even _it_ was a juvenile compared with some of the rocks and
mountains which the Hudson of to-day mirrors. The Highlands date
from the earliest geological race--the primary; the river--the old
river--from the latest, the tertiary; and what that difference
means in terrestrial years hath not entered into the mind of man to
conceive. Yet how the venerable mountains open their ranks for the
stripling to pass through. Of course, the river did not force its way
through this barrier, but has doubtless found an opening there of
which it has availed itself, and which it has enlarged. In thinking
of these things, one only has to allow time enough, and the most
stupendous changes in the topography of the country are as easy
and natural as the going out or the coming in of spring or summer.
According to the authority above referred to, that part of our coast
that flanks the mouth of the Hudson is still sinking at the rate of a
few inches per century, so that in the twinkling of a hundred thousand
years or so, the sea will completely submerge the city of New York,
the top of Trinity Church steeple alone standing above the flood. We
who live so far inland, and sigh for the salt water, need only to have
a little patience, and we shall wake up some fine morning and find the
surf beating upon our door-steps."

       * * *

    A sloop, loitering in the distance, dropped slowly
    with the tide, her sail hanging loosely against the
    mast; and as the reflection of the sky gleamed along
    the still water, it seemed as if the vessel was suspended
    in the air.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

How strange it seems in these brief years since 1880 to read of
"Trinity Church steeple standing alone above the flood" as the rising
tide of New York skyscrapers has long since overtopped the old
landmark and is sweeping higher and higher day by day.

The Frothingham residence and Frothingham dock are south of the
Burroughs cottage. The late General Butterfield's house immediately to
the north. The old Astor place (once known as Waldorf), is also near
at hand. In our analysis of the Hudson we refer to the hills above and
below Poughkeepsie as "The Picturesque." Any one walking or driving
from Highland Village to West Park will feel that this is a proper
distinction. The Palisades are distinguished for "grandeur" which
might be defined as "horizontal sublimity." The Highlands for
"sublimity" which might be termed "perpendicular grandeur;" the
Catskills for "beauty," with their rounded form and ever changing
hues, but the river scenery about Poughkeepsie abides in our memories
as a series of bright and charming "pictures." North of Waldorf is
Pelham, consisting of 1,200 acres, one of the largest fruit farms in
the world. Passing Esopus Island, which seems like a great stranded
and petrified whale, along whose sides often cluster Lilliputian-like
canoeists, we see Brown's Dock on the west bank at the mouth of Black
Creek, which rises eight miles from Newburgh on the eastern slope of
the Plaaterkill Mountains. Flowing through Black Pond, known by the
Dutch settlers as the "Grote Binnewater," it cascades its way along
the southern slope of the Shaupeneak Mountains to Esopus Village,
a cross-road hamlet, and thence carries to the Hudson its waters
dark-stained by companionship with trees of hemlock and cedar growth.
The Pell property extends on the west bank to Pell's Dock, almost
opposite the Staatsburgh ice houses. Mrs. Livingston's residence will
now be seen on the east bank, and just above this the home of the late
William B. Dinsmore on Dinsmore Point. Passing Vanderberg Cove, cut
off from the river by the tracks of the _New York Central Railroad_,
we see the residence of Jacob Ruppert, and above this the Frinck
mansion known as "Windercliffe," formerly the property of E. R. Jones,
and next beyond the house of Robert Suckly. Passing Ellerslie Dock we
see "Ellerslie," the palatial summer home of ex-Vice-President Levi
P. Morton, an estate of six hundred acres, formerly owned by the Hon.
William Kelly. Along the western bank extend the Esopus meadows, a low
flat, covered by water, the southern end of which is marked by the
Esopus light-house. To the west rises Hussey's Mountain, about one
thousand feet in height, from under whose eastern slope two little
ponds, known as Binnewaters, send another stream to join Black Creek
before it flows into the Hudson. Port Ewen on the west bank, with ice
houses and brick yards, will be seen by steamer passengers below the
mouth of Rondout Creek.

       * * *

  At dawn the river seems a shade,
    A liquid shadow deep as space,
  But when the sun the mist has laid
    A diamond shower smites its face.

  _John Burroughs._

       * * *

=Rhinecliff=, 90 miles from New York. The village of Rhinebeck, two
miles east of the landing, is not seen from the river. It was named,
as some contend, by combining two words--Beekman and Rhine. Others say
that the word beck means cliff, and the town was so named from the
resemblance of the cliffs to those of the Rhine. There are many
delightful drives in and about Rhinebeck, "Ellerslie" being only about
eight minutes by carriage from the landing.

_The Philadelphia & Reading Rhinebeck Branch_ meets the Hudson at
Rhinecliff, and makes a pleasant and convenient tourist or business
route between the Hudson and the Connecticut. It passes through a
delightful country and thriving rural villages. Some of the views
along the Roeliffe Jansen's Kill are unrivaled in quiet beauty. The
railroad passes through Rhinebeck, Red Hook, Spring Lake, Ellerslie,
Jackson Corners, Mount Ross, Gallatinville, Ancram, Copake, Boston
Corners, and Mount Riga to State Line Junction, and gives a person a
good idea of the counties of Dutchess and Columbia. At Boston Corners
connection is made with the _Harlem Railroad_.

       * * *

  Upon thy tessellated surface lie
  The wave-glassed splendors of the sunset sky!

  _Knickerbocker Magazine._

       * * *

From State Line Junction it passes through Ore Hill, Lakeville with
its beautiful lake (an evening view of which is still hung in our
memory gallery of sunset sketches), Salisbury, Chapinville, and Twin
Lakes to Canaan, where the line crosses the _Housatonic Railroad._
This route, therefore, is the easiest and pleasantest for Housatonic
visitors _en route_ to the Catskills. From Canaan the road rises by
easy grade to the summit, at an elevation of 1,400 feet, passing
through the village of Norfolk, with its picturesque New England
church crowning the village hill, and thence to Simsbury and Hartford.

=The City of Kingston.=--Rondout and Kingston gradually grew together
until the bans were performed in 1878, and a "bow-knot" tied at
the top of the hill in the shape of a city hall, making them one
corporation.

The name Rondout had its derivation from a redoubt that was built
on the banks of the creek. The creek took the name of Redoubt Kill,
afterward Rundoubt, and at last Rondout. Kingston was once called
Esopus. (The Indian name for the spot where the city now stands was
At-kar-karton, the great plot or meadow on which they raised corn or
beans.)

Kingston and Rondout were both settled in 1614, and old Kingston,
known by the Dutch as Wiltwyck, was thrice destroyed by the Indians
before the Revolution. In 1777 the State legislature met here and
formed a constitution. In the fall of the same year, after the capture
of Fort Montgomery and Fort Clinton by the British, Vaughan landed at
Rondout, marched to Kingston, and burned the town. While Kingston
was burning, the inhabitants fled to Hurley, where a small force of
Americans hung a messenger who was caught carrying dispatches from
Clinton to Burgoyne.

       * * *

  What ample bays and branching streams,
    What curves abrupt for glad surprise,
  And how supreme the artist is
    Who paints it all for loving eyes.

  _Henry Abbey._

       * * *

Rondout is the termination of the Delaware and Hudson Canal (whence
canal boats of coal find their way from the Pennsylvania Mountains
to tidewater), also of the _Ulster and Delaware Railroad_, by which
people find their way from tidewater to the Catskill Mountains, which
have greeted the eye of the tourist for many miles down the Hudson.
Originally all of the country-side in this vicinity was known as
Esopus, supposed to be derived, according to Ruttenber, from the
Indian word "seepus," a river. A "sopus Indian" was a Lowlander, and
the name is intimately connected with a long reach of territory
from Esopus Village, near West Park, to the mouth of the Esopus at
Saugerties. In 1675 the mouth of the Rondout Creek was chosen by the
New Netherland Company as one of the three fortified trading ports
on the Hudson; a stockade was built under the guidance of General
Stuyvesant in 1661 inclosing the site of old Kingston; a charter was
granted in 1658 under the name of Wiltwyck, but changed in 1679 to
Kingston. Few cities are so well off for old-time houses that span the
century, and there is no congregation probably in the United States
that has worshipped so many consecutive years in the same spot as the
Dutch Reformed people of Kingston. Five buildings have succeeded the
log church of 240 years ago. Dr. Van Slyke, in a recent welcome, said:
"This church, which opens her doors to you, claims a distinction which
does not belong even to the Collegiate Dutch Churches of Manhattan
Island, and, by a peculiar history, stands identified more closely
with Holland than any other of the early churches of this country.
When every other church of our communion had for a long time been
associated with an American Synod, this church retained its relations
to the Classis of Amsterdam, and, after a period of independency and
isolation, it finally allied itself with its American sisterhood as
late as the year 1808. We still have three or four members whose life
began before that date."

       * * *

  Yet there are those who lie beside thy bed
  For whom thou once didst rear the bowers that screen
  Thy margin, and didst water the green fields;
  And now there is no night so still that they
  Can hear thy lapse.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

Dominie Blom was the first preacher in Kingston. The church where he
preached and the congregation that gathered to hear him have been
tenderly referred to by the Rev. Dr. Belcher:

  "They've journeyed on from touch and tone;
    No more their ears shall hear
  The war-whoop wild, or sad death moan,
    Or words of fervid prayer;
  But the deeds they did and plans they planned,
    And paths of blood they trod,
  Have blessed and brightened all this land
    And hallowed it for God."

=The Senate House=, built in 1676 by Wessel Ten Broeck, who would seem
by his name to have stepped bodily out of a chapter of Knickerbocker,
was "burned" but not "down," for its walls stood firm. It was
afterwards repaired, and sheltered many dwellers, among others,
General Armstrong, secretary of war under President Madison. The
Provincial Convention met in the court house at Kingston in 1777 and
the Constitution was formally announced April 22d of that year. The
first court was held here September 9th and the first legislature
September 10th. Adjourning October 7th, they convened again August
18th, 1779, and in 1780, from April 22d to July 2d, also for two
months beginning January 27, 1783.

It was in the yard in front of the court house that the Constitution
of the State was proclaimed by Robert Berrian, the secretary of the
Constitutional Convention, and it was there that George Clinton, the
first Governor of the State, was inaugurated and took the oath of
office. It was in the court house that John Jay, chief justice,
delivered his memorable charge to the grand jury in September, 1777,
and at the opening said: "Gentlemen, it affords me very sensible
pleasure to congratulate you on the dawn of that free, mild, and equal
government which now begins to rise and break from amidst the clouds
of anarchy, confusion and licentiousness, which the arbitrary and
violent domination of the King of Great Britain has spread, in greater
or less degree, throughout this and other American states. And it
gives me particular satisfaction to remark that the first fruits
of our excellent Constitution appear in a part of this State whose
inhabitants have distinguished themselves by having unanimously
endeavored to deserve them." The court house bell was originally
imported from Holland.

       * * *

  Pinched by famine and menaced by foe
  In the cruel winters of long ago,
  They worked and prayed and for freedom wrought,
  Freedom of speech and freedom of thought.

  _Frederica Davis Hatfield._

       * * *

The burning of Kingston seemed unnecessarily cruel, and it is said
that Vaughan was wide of the truth when, to justify the same, he
claimed that he had been fired upon from dwellings in the village.
General Sharpe in his address before the Holland Society says: "The
history of this county begins to be interesting at the earliest stages
of American history: Visited by Dutchmen in 1614, and again in 1620,
it was in the very earliest Colonial history, one of the strong places
of the Province of New York. The British museum contains the report
of the Rev. John Miller, written in the year 1695, who, after 'having
been nearly three years resident in the Province of New York, in
America, as chaplain of His Majesty's forces there, and constantly
attending the Governor, had opportunity of observing many things of
considerable consequence in relation to the Christians and Indians,
and had also taken the drafts of all the cities, towns, forts and
churches of any note within the same.' These are his own words, and
he adds that in the Province of New York 'the places of strength are
chiefly three, the city of New York, the city of Albany, and the town
of Kingstone, in Ulster.' The east, north and west fronts ran along
elevations overlooking the lowlands and having a varying altitude
of from twenty to thirty feet. The enclosure comprehended about
twenty-five acres of land. There were salients, or horn works at each
end of the four angles, with a circular projection at the middle
of the westerly side, where the elevation was less than upon the
northerly and easterly sides. The church standing upon the ground
where we now are, was enclosed with a separate stockade, to be used
as the last resort in case of disaster, and, projecting from this
separate fortification, a strong block-house commanded and enfiladed
the approaches to the southerly side, which was a plain. The local
history is of continued and dramatic interest. The Indian wars were
signalized by a great uprising and attack here, which was known as
the war of 1663, when a considerable number of the inhabitants
were killed, a still larger number were taken prisoners, and about
one-fourth of the houses were burned to the ground. Reinforcements
were sent by the governor-general from New Amsterdam, followed by his
personal presence, when the Indians were driven back to the mountains,
and, after a tedious campaign, their fields destroyed and the
prisoners recaptured. When the next great crisis in our history came
Kingston bore a conspicuous part. It was the scene of the formation of
the State Government. The Constitution was here discussed and
adopted. George Clinton was called from the Highlands, where, as a
brigadier-general of the Continental army, he was commanding all the
forces upon the Hudson River, which were opposing the attempts of Sir
Henry Clinton to reach the northern part of the State and relieve
Burgoyne, hemmed in by Gates at Saratoga. He was the ideal war
governor--unbuckling his sword in the court room, that he might take
the oath of office, and returning, immediately after the simple form
of his inauguration, to his command upon the Hudson River.

       * * *

  A paradise of beauty in the light
  Poured by the sinking sun, the mountain glows
  In the soft summer evening.

  _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

"The court house, standing opposite to us, and rebuilt upon its old
foundations, and occupying, substantially, the same superficies of
ground with its predecessors, recalls the dramatic scene where,
surrounded by the council of safety, and in a square formed by two
companies of soldiers, he was proclaimed Governor by Egbert Dumond,
the sheriff of the county, reading his proclamation from the top of a
barrel, and closing it with the words 'God save the people,' for the
first time taking the place of 'God save the King.' The only building
in any way connected with the civil foundation of this great State is
still standing, and presents the same appearance that it did at the
time of its erection, prior to the year 1690. It was subsequently
occupied by General Armstrong, who, while residing here for the better
education of his children, in Kingston Academy, was appointed minister
to France. Aaron Burr, then in attendance upon court, spent an evening
with General Armstrong, at his house, and, having observed the merit
of sundry sketches, made inquiry with regard to, and interested
himself in the fate of John Vanderlyn, who afterwards painted the
Landing of Columbus in the Capitol, and Marius upon the Ruins of
Carthage--which attracted the attention of the elder Napoleon, and
established Vanderlyn's fame. There are more than forty blue limestone
houses of the general type found in Holland, still standing to-day,
which were built before the revolutionary period, and many of them
before the year 1700."

       * * *

  Are there no scenes to touch the poet's soul,
    No deeds of arms to wake the lordly stream,
  Shall Hudson's billows unregarded roll?

  _Joseph Rodman Drake._

       * * *

  River, oh river! upon thy tide
  Gaily the freighted vessels glide.
  Would that thou thus couldst bear away
  The thoughts that burthen my weary day.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

Coal, cement and blue-stone are the prominent industries of the city.
The cement works yield several million dollars annually and employ
about two thousand men. A million tons of coal enter the Hudson _via_
the Port of Rondout from the Wyoming Valley of Pennsylvania every
year. Blue-stone also meets tide-water at this point, brought in from
quarries throughout the country by rail or by truck. The city of
Kingston, the largest station on the _West Shore_ between Weehawken
and Albany, has admirable railroad facilities connecting with the
_Erie Railway_ at Goshen _via_ the _Wallkill Valley_, and the
Catskills _via_ the _Ulster & Delaware_. All roads centre at the Union
Station and the _Ulster & Delaware_ connects at Kingston Point with
the Hudson River Day Line, also with the _New York Central_ by ferry
from Rhinebeck.

=To the Catskills.=--The two principal routes to the Catskills are
_via_ Kingston and the _Ulster & Delaware Railroad_, and _via_
Catskill Landing, the _Catskill Mountain Railway_ and _Otis Elevating
Railway_ to the summit of the mountains. It has occurred to the writer
to divide the mountain section in two parts:

=The Southern Catskills.=--Kingston Point, where the steamer lands is
indeed a _picturesque portal to a picturesque journey_. The beautiful
park at the landing presents the most beautiful frontage of any
pleasure ground along the river. Artistic pagodas located at effective
points add greatly to the natural landscape effect, and excursionists
_via_ Day Line from Albany have a delightful spot for lunch and
recreation while waiting for the return steamer. In the busy months of
mountain travel it is interesting to note the rush and hurry between
the landing of the steamer and the departure of the train. The "all
aboard" is given, and as we stand on the rear platform a friend points
north to a bluff near Kingston Point and says the Indian name is
"Ponckhockie"--signifying a burial ground. The old redoubts of
Kingston, on the left, were defenses used in early days against the
Indians.

After leaving Kingston Union Depot, the most important station on
the _West Shore Railroad_, and the terminus of the _Wallkill Valley
Railroad_, we pass through Stony Hollow, eight miles from Rondout,
where the traveler will note the stone tracks in the turnpike below,
on the right side of the car, used by quarry wagons. Crossing the
Stony Hollow ravine, we reach West Hurley, nine miles from Rondout and
540 feet above the sea.

=The Overlook= commands an extensive view,--with an area of 30,000
square miles, from the peaks of New Hampshire and the Green Mountains
of Vermont to the hills of New Jersey and Pennsylvania. To the east
the valley reaches away with its towns and villages to the blue hills
of Massachusetts and Connecticut, and, through this beautiful valley,
the Hudson for a hundred miles is reduced to a mere ribbon of light.
Woodstock, at the foot of the Overlook, is popular with summer
visitors, and is a good starting point for the mountain outlook.

       * * *

  Let me forget the cares I leave behind,
  And with an humble spirit bow before
  The Maker of these everlasting hills.

  _Bayard Taylor._

       * * *

=Olive Branch= is the pretty name of the station above West Hurley.
Temple Pond, at the foot of Big Toinge Mountain, covers about one
hundred acres, and affords boating and fishing to those visiting the
foothills of the Southern Catskills.

=Brown's Station= is three miles beyond, and near at hand Winchell's
Falls on the Esopus. The Esopus Creek comes in view near this station
for the first time after leaving Kingston. The route now has pleasant
companionship for twenty miles or more with the winding stream.

=Brodhead's Bridge= is delightfully located on its wooded banks near
the base of High Point, and near at hand is a bright cascade known as
Bridal Veil Falls.

       * * *

  Then climb the Ontioras to behold
    The lordly Hudson marching to the main,
  And say what bard in any land of old
    Had such a river to inspire his strain.

  _Thomas William Parsons._

       * * *

=Shokan=, 18 miles from Rondout. Here the road takes a northerly
course and we are advised by Mr. Van Loan's guide to notice on the
left "a group of five mountains forming a crescent; the peaks of
these mountains are four miles distant;" the right-hand one is the
"Wittenberg," and the next "Mount Cornell." Boiceville and Mount
Pleasant, 700 feet above the Hudson, are next reached. We enter the
beautiful Shandaken Valley, and three miles of charming mountain
scenery bring us to--

=Phoenicia=, 29 miles from Rondout and 790 feet above the Hudson.
This is one of the central points of the Catskills which the mountain
streams (nature's engineers), indicated several thousand years ago.
Readers of "Hiawatha" will remember that Gitche Manitou, the mighty,
traced with his finger the way the streams and rivers should run. The
tourist will be apt to think that he used his thumb in marking out
the wild grandeur of Stony Clove. The Tremper House has a picturesque
location in a charming valley, which seems to have been cut to fit,
like a beautiful carpet, and tacked down to the edge of these grand
old mountains. A fifteen minutes' walk up Mount Tremper gives a wide
view, from which the Lake Mohonk House is sometimes seen, forty
miles away. Phoenicia is one of the most important stations on the
line--the southern terminus of the Stony Clove and Catskill Mountain
division of the _Ulster & Delaware_ system. Keeping to the main line
for the present we pass through Allaben, formerly known as Fox Hollow,
and come to--

=Shandaken=, 35 miles from Rondout and 1,060 feet in altitude, an
Indian name signifying "rapid water." Here are large hotels and many
boarding houses and the town is a central point for many mountain
spots and shady retreats in every direction--all of which are well
described in one of the handsomest summer resort guides of the season,
the handbook of the _Ulster & Delaware Railroad_. Three miles beyond
Shandaken we come to a little station whose name reminds one of the
plains: _Big Indian_, 1,209 feet above the river.

       * * *

            Along the ragged top
  Smiles a rich stripe of gold that up still glides
  Until it dwindles to a thread and then,
  As breath glides from a mirror, melts away.

  _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

=Big Indian.=--It is said that about a century ago, a noble red man
dwelt in these parts, who, early in life, turned his attention to
agriculture instead of scalping, and won thereby the respect of the
community. Tradition has it that he was about seven feet in height,
but was overpowered by wolves, and was buried by his brethren not far
from the station, where a "big Indian" was carved out of a tree near
by for his monument. An old and reliable inhabitant stated that he
remembered the rude statue well, and often thought that it ought to be
saved for a relic, as the stream was washing away the roots; but it
was finally carried down by a freshet, and probably found its way to
some fire-place in the Esopus Valley. "So man passes away, as with a
flood." There is another tale, one of love but less romantic, wherein
he was killed by his rival and placed upright in a hollow tree.
Perhaps neither tradition is true, and quite possibly the Big Indian
name grew out of some misunderstanding between the Indians and white
settlers over a hundred years ago. As the train leaves the station it
begins a grade of 150 feet per mile to--

=Pine Hill=, a station perched on the slope of Belle Ayr Mountain.
This is the watershed between the Esopus and the Delaware, and 226
feet above us, around the arcs of a double horseshoe, is the railway
summit, 1,886 feet above the tide.

=Grand Hotel Station.=--The New Grand, the second largest hotel in the
Catskills, with a frontage of 700 feet, stands on a commanding terrace
less than half a mile from the station. The main building faces
southwest and overlooks the hamlet of Pine Hill, down the Shandaken
Valley to Big Indian. The mountains, "grouped like giant kings" in
the distance are Slide Mountain, Panther Mountain, Table and Balsam
Mountains. Panther Mountain, directly over Big Indian Station, with
Atlas-like shoulders, being nearer, seems higher, and is often
mistaken for Slide Mountain. Table Mountain, to the right of the
Slide, is the divide between the east branch of the Neversink and the
Rondout.

Continuing our journey from the summit we pass through Fleischmann's
to--

=Arkville=, railway station for Margaretville, one and a half miles
distant, and Andes twelve miles--connected by stages. Furlough Lake,
the mountain home of George Gould, is seven miles from Arkville. An
artificial cave near Arkville, with hieroglyphics on the inner
walls, attracts many visitors. Passing through Kelly's Corners and
Halcottville, we come to--

=Roxbury= (altitude 1,497 feet), a quaint old village at the upper end
of which is the Gould Memorial Church. Miss Helen Gould spends part of
her summer here and has done much to make beautiful the village of her
father's boyhood. Grand Gorge comes next 1,570 feet above the tide,
where stages are taken for Gilboa three miles, and Prattsville five
miles distant, on the Schoharie Creek. Pratt's Rocks are visited by
hundreds because of the carving in bas-relief of Colonel Pratt and
figures emblematic of his career.

       * * *

  Softly the mist-mantled mountains arise
  Dim in the dawning of opal-hued skies,
  Nearer and clearer peaks burst on the view
  Lightened by silvery flashes of dew.

  _James Kennedy._

       * * *

=Stamford= is now at hand, seventy-six miles from the Hudson, about
1,800 feet above the sea, named by settlers from Stamford, Conn. Here
are many large hotels, chief among them The Rexmere and Churchill
Hall. Thirteen miles from Stamford we come to Hobart, four miles
further to South Kortright, and then to--

=Bloomville=, eighty-nine miles from the Hudson, where a stage line of
eight miles takes the traveler to Delhi. Passing through Kortright,
ninety-two miles from the Hudson, 1,868 feet above the tide, East
Meredith, Davenport, West Davenport (where passengers _en route_ for
Cooperstown and Richfield Springs are transferred to the _Cooperstown
and Charlotte Valley R. R._) and four miles bring us to

=Oneonta=, on the Susquehanna division of the _Hudson & Delaware R. R._
Returning to Phoenicia we take train through "Stony Clove Notch,"
passing Chichester, Lanesville, Edgewood and Kaaterskill Junction to--

=Hunter=, terminus of the Stony Clove Road. Resuming the eastward
journey at Kaaterskill Junction we come to--

=Tannersville=, near which are Elka Park, Onteora Park and Schoharie
Manor.

=Haines Corners= is another busy station, at the head of Kaaterskill
Clove. On the slope of Mt. Lincoln have also been established
"Twilight," "Santa Cruz" and "Sunset" Parks.

=Laurel House Station.=--Here the voice of a waterfall invites the
tourist to one of the most famous spots in the Catskill region and a
mile beyond is

=Kaaterskill Station=, 2,145 feet above the sea, the highest point
reached by any railroad in the State, and half a mile or so further we
alight on a rocky balcony, known for its beautiful view all over the
world.

       * * *

  From greens and shades where the Kaaterskill leaps,
  From cliffs where the wood-flowers cling.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

=Kingston to Catskill.=

=Rhinecliff=, with its historic Beekman stone house, is on the east
bank of the river opposite Kingston. The old mansion, on the hillside,
above the landing, was built before 1700 by William Beekman, first
patroon of this section. It was used as a church and as a fort during
the Indian struggles and still preserves the scar of a cannon ball
from a British ship.

=Ferncliff=, a mile north of the Beekman House, is the home of John
Jacob Astor, formerly the property of William Astor, and above this

=Clifton Point=, once known as the Garretson place, the noted
Methodist preacher whose wife was sister of Chancellor Livingston, and
above this Douglas Merritt's home known as "Leacote." Flatbush landing
lies on the west bank opposite Ferncliff.

One might almost imagine from the names of places and individuals here
grouped on both banks of the river, that this reach of the Hudson
was a bit of old Scotland: Montgomery Place and Annandale with its
Livingstons, Donaldsons and Kidds on the east side, and Glenerie,
Glasgo and Lake Katrine on the west.

       * * *

  The Catskills to the northward rise
    With massive swell and towering crest--
  The old-time "mountains of the skies,"
    The threshold of eternal rest.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Barrytown= is just above "Daisy Island," on the east bank, 96 miles
from New York. It is said when General Jackson was President, and this
village wanted a postoffice, that he would not allow it under the name
of Barrytown, from personal dislike to General Barry, and suggested
another name; but the people were loyal to their old friend, and
_went without_ a postoffice until a new administration. The name of
Barrytown, therefore, stands as a monument to pluck. The place was
once known as Lower Red Hook Landing. Passing "Massena," the Aspinwall
property, we see--

=Montgomery Place=, residence of Carleton Hunt and sisters, about
one-half mile north of Barrytown, formerly occupied by Mrs.
Montgomery, wife of General Montgomery and sister of Chancellor
Livingston. The following dramatic incident connected with Montgomery
Place is recorded in Stone's "History of New York City": "In 1818 the
legislature of New York--DeWitt Clinton, Governor--ordered the remains
of General Montgomery to be removed from Canada to New York. This was
in accordance with the wishes of the Continental Congress, which, in
1776, had voted the beautiful cenotaph to his memory that now stands
in the wall of St. Paul's Church, fronting Broadway. When the funeral
cortege reached Whitehall, N. Y., the fleet stationed there received
them with appropriate honors; and on the 4th of July they arrived in
Albany. After lying in state in that city over Sunday, the remains
were taken to New York, and on Wednesday deposited, with military
honors, in their final resting place, at St. Paul's. Governor Clinton
had informed Mrs. Montgomery of the hour when the steamer 'Richmond,'
conveying the body, would pass her home. At her own request, she stood
alone on the portico. It was forty years since she had parted from her
husband, to whom she had been wedded but two years when he fell on the
heights of Quebec; yet she had remained faithful to the memory of her
'soldier,' as she always called him. The steamboat halted before the
mansion; the band played the 'Dead March,' and a salute was fired; and
the ashes of the venerated hero, and the departed husband, passed on.
The attendants of the Spartan widow now appeared, but, overcome by
the tender emotions of the moment, she had swooned and fallen to the
floor."

       * * *

  The river that he loved so well
    Like a full heart is awed to calm,
  The winter air that wafts his knell
    Is fragrant with autumnal balm.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

The Sawkill Creek flows through a beautiful ravine in Montgomery
grounds and above this is the St. Stephen's College and Preparatory
School of the Episcopal Church in the Diocese of New York. Beyond and
above this are Mrs. E. Bartlett's home and Deveaux Park, afterwards
Almonte, the property of Col. Charles Livingston. We are now
approaching--

=Cruger's Island=, with its indented South Bay reaching up toward the
bluff crowned by Montgomery Place. There is an old Indian tradition
that no person ever died on this island, which a resident recently
said still held true. It is remarkable, moreover, in possessing many
antique carved stones from a city of Central America built into the
walls of a temple modeled after the building from which the graven
stones were brought. The "ruin" at the south end of the island is
barely visible from the steamer, hidden as it is by foliage, but it is
distinctly seen by _New York Central_ travelers in the winter season.
Colonel Cruger has spared no expense in the adornment of his grounds,
and a beautiful drive is afforded the visitor. The island is connected
by a roadway across a tongue of land which separates the North from
the South Bay. Above this island east of the steamer's channel across
the railway of the _New York Central_, we see a historic bit of water
known as--

=The North Bay.= It was here that Robert Fulton developed his
steamboat invention, receiving pecuniary aid from Chancellor
Livingston, and it is fitting to give at this place a concise account
of

=Steam Navigation=, which after many attempts and failures on both
sides of the Atlantic was at last crowned with success on the Hudson.

=John Fitch= first entertained his idea of a steamboat in 1785, and
sent to the general assembly of the State of Pennsylvania a model in
1786. New Jersey and Delaware in 1787, gave him exclusive right to
navigate their waters for fourteen years, which, however, was never
undertaken. His steamboat "Perseverance," on the Delaware in 1787, was
eighteen feet in length and six feet beam. The name, however, was a
misnomer, as it was abandoned. These facts appear by papers on file in
the State Library at Albany. Afte