ies.

"For three years I have upheld the dignity of your honourable Court as
ale-taster without emolument, stipend, fee or perquisite of any kind.
I have even been dragged before a subordinate Court and fined five
shillings and costs whilst fulfilling the duties of my office. My
great service should receive some slight acknowledgment at your hands,
and thus would be secured the upright discharge of those duties you
expect me to fulfil; and my imperial gill measure, which I carry along
with me as my baton of office, should bear the seal of your
honourafter a brief repose, the Monday was spent in a similar manner.
Very often the Tuesday also was devoted to the like purpose. But
sound, however sweet, is but sorry food for hungry stomachs, and,
consequently, during the remaining days of the week, the loom had to
be plied with unremitting vigour to supply the ever-recurring wants of
the household.

It is related of two of the "Layrocks"--father and son--that they had
been busy trying to master a difficult piece of music, one with the
violin, the other with the violoncello, but were still unable to
execute certain of the more intricate movements to their satisfaction.
They had put their instruments aside for the night, and had retired to
rest. After his "first sleep," the younger enthusiast, in ruminating
over the performance of the evening, thought that if he might only
rise and attempt the piece _then_, he should be able to manage it.
Creeping from under the bed-clothes, he awoke his father, who also
arose; and soon the two in their shirts might have been seen, through
the unscreened window, flourishing their bows at an hour when ordinary
mortals are laid unconscious in the arms of Somnus. The lonely
traveller, had there been one at that untimely hour, would surely,
like Tam o' Shanter as he passed by "Alloway's auld haunted Kirk,"
have felt his hair rising on end at the sight of two ghostly
individuals scraping music at the dead of night, and in such unwonted
attire.

       *       *       *       *       *

The early Bacup Baptists used to immerse in the river Irwell at Lumb
Head. A story is related of an irreverent wag who placed a prickly
thorn at the bottom of the pool when old "Ab o' th' Yate" was
baptized. On complaining of the injuries he had sustained in the
process of immersion, Ab was consoled by being assured that it must
have been his sins that were pricking him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Richard Taylor of Bacup, the Rossendale "Ale-taster," was a humorist
of the first water. His proper calling was that of a spindle maker,
hence his sobriquet of "Spindle Dick," a rare workman at his trade
when he chose, and in his soberer hours. He was a fellow of infinite
jest, not lacking in sound judgment, but with that kind of twist in
his nature that would never allow him for two minutes at a spell to
treat any subject in a serious mood. In his hands there was nothing
incongruous or far-fetched in the office of ale-taster. Its duties,
incrusted with the antiquity of centuries, came as naturally to him as
though he had been living in the time of the Heptarchy, and was to the
manner born. The incongruity was when he forsook, as he occasionally
did, his ale-tasting duties and applied himself assiduously to his
business of spindle making.

The appointment of ale-taster took place annually along with those of
the greave, moor and hedge lookers, bellman and officers for the
assize of bread at the Halmot Court of the Lord of the Honor.

In earlier days the punishment for brewing or publicly vending bad ale
was either a fine or a two hours' seat upon the cuck-stool before the
culprit's own door. The drink, if pronounced by a discriminating judge
to be _undrinkable_, being handed over to the poor folk.

It is only in a district like Rossendale, that such an interesting
relic of the olden time could have survived. Regularly as the month
of October came round, Dick put in an appearance at the Halmot Court
and was reinstated in his office with due formality. A memorial
presented by him to the Court Leet contains some touches of dry humour
highly characteristic of the man. In this he says:

"From a natural bashfulness, and being unaccustomed to public
speaking, which my friends tell me is a very fortunate circumstance, I
am induced to lay my claim in writing before your honourable Court.

"The appointment which I hold is a very ancient one, dating, as you
are aware, from the time of the good King Alfred, when the Court Leet
appointed their head-borough, tithing-men, burs-holder and ale-taster;
which appointments were again regulated in the time of Edward III.;
and through neglect this important office to a beer-imbibing
population ought not to be suffered to fall into disrepute or
oblivion.

"In Rossendale there are countless numbers of practical followers of
the school to which that illustrious Dutchman, Mynheer Van Dunck,
belonged, and while they imbibe less brandy, they make up for it in
beer. For some Rossendale men, indeed, beer is meat, drink, washing
and lodging: and do away with the office of ale-taster, an inferior
quality of the beverage may be sold, and the consequent waste of
tissue among the working classes would be something awful to
contemplate. Your honourable Court, then, cannot but perceive the vast
importance of my office.

"At the time when Rossendale was in reality a forest, and a squirrel
could jump from one tree to another from Sharneyford to Rawtenstall
without touching the ground, the office of ale-taster was no doubt a
sinecure; but with the growth of population and the spread of
intelligence in Rossendale there has been a proportionate increase of
licensed public-houses and beer-shops, which has created a
corresponding amount of responsibility in my duties.

"For three years I have upheld the dignity of your honourable Court as
ale-taster without emolument, stipend, fee or perquisite of any kind.
I have even been dragged before a subordinate Court and fined five
shillings and costs whilst fulfilling the duties of my office. My
great service should receive some slight acknowledgment at your hands,
and thus would be secured the upright discharge of those duties you
expect me to fulfil; and my imperial gill measure, which I carry along
with me as my baton of office, should bear the seal of your
honourable Court.

"The quality of the beer retailed at the Rossendale public-houses is
generally good, and calculated to prevent the deterioration of tissue,
and I do not detect any signs of adulteration. The only complaint I
have to make is of the quality of the ales sold at Newchurch during
the week in which 'Kirk Fair,' is held; they are not then up to the
mark in point of strength and flavour; but this is a speciality, and
it is the only speciality that I feel bound to comment upon, excepting
that which immediately concerns your obedient servant, Richard Taylor,
Ale-taster for that part of Her Majesty's dominions known as
Rossendale."

On a later occasion Mr Taylor sent in his resignation to the Halmot
Court as follows:

"Gentlemen, I respectfully, but firmly, tender my resignation as the
ale-taster of the Forest, an office which I have held for seven years
without any salary or fee of any description. During that period I
have done my duty both to his grace the Duke of Buccleuch (Lord of the
Honor of Clitheroe in which is the Forest of Rossendale) and to the
inhabitants generally. From feelings of humanity I refrain from
suggesting anyone as my successor, for unless he possesses an iron
constitution, if he does his duty to the appointment, he will either
be a dead man before the next Court day, or he will have to retire
with a shattered constitution."

The Court, however, declined to entertain Mr Taylor's petition, and
reappointed him to the office he had so long filled with so much
credit to himself (though with very questionable benefit) and to the
advantage of the many thirsty souls within his jurisdiction.

The reference to "Kirk Fair," and to the quality of the ale sold there
on those occasions will be appreciated by those who know the district.
For three successive days the streets of the village are thronged with
a surging mass of people on pleasure bent. As many of these come long
distances in the heat of summer, with their parched throats and high
spirits, they are naturally less critical of the quality of their
drink than at ordinary times; and the publicans, with what amount of
truth beyond the declaration of the official ale-taster, I am not
prepared to vouch, were suspected of taking advantage of the
circumstances to thin down and lengthen out their ales.

When in discharge of the functions of his curious calling of
ale-taster, Dick carried in his coat pocket a pewter gill measure of
his own fashioning, of peculiar old-world shape, with a turned
ebony-wood handle in the form of a cross that projected straight from
the middle of the side. This symbol of his office was secured by a
leathern thong about half a yard in length, one end being round the
handle, the other through a button-hole in his coat. After a day's
official work he might occasionally be seen, with unsteady gait,
wending his way up the lane to his domicile on the hillside, with the
gill measure dangling below his knee.

Not unfrequently he had to appear before the Bench for being drunk and
incapable, and though he was sometimes mulcted in a fine, as often as
not some smart sally of wit won the admiration and sympathy of the
"Great Unpaid," who let him down as softly as their sense of duty
would permit. Dick, on those occasions, would declare that it was his
legs only, and not his head, that was drunk. He would assert that,
like a barrel, he was easily upset when only partially filled; but,
when full to the bung and end up, he was steady as a rock.

At one time in his career Dick kept a beer-house, the sign over the
door being a representation of the Globe, with the head and shoulders
of a man projecting through it, and underneath it the legend: "Help me
through this World!" By way of counteracting any bad moral effects
that arose from his vending of beer on week-days, he taught a
Bible-class in a room over the beer-shop on Sundays. He christened one
of his sons "Gentleman," Gentleman Taylor, being determined, as he
said, to have one gentleman in the family, whatever else.

Poor Dick Taylor! I always felt grateful to his personality and to the
humour which girt him round. He was a link that bound us to the past;
a kind of embodied poetical idea in keeping with the ancient Forest
and its traditions. I have more than half a suspicion that he must
have been lying dormant for centuries in the muniment-room of
Clitheroe Castle, and, like Rip Van Winkle, awoke at length to resume
his interrupted duties. I never conversed with him without being
carried in imagination back to bygone times, and on such occasions it
was with a half-resentful feeling of annoyance that the proximity of a
later--should we be justified in saying, a higher?--civilization, in
the guise of a smoky factory chimney, dispelled the illusion.

The post of ale-taster, though still nominally maintained, is in
reality obsolete, and could not be revived, even in out-of-the-way
places, without committing an anachronism. Even in Dick Taylor's day
the office was looked upon as belonging to the past--a relic of a
bygone age, in which a social system, different from the present,
prevailed. It belonged to the days of stocks and pillories, of ducking
and cucking stools and scolds' bridles; of sluggard wakeners and dog
whippers. _Tempora mutantur._ It needed a genial humorist to assume
the duties of the office in this latter half of the nineteenth
century, and a vulgar imitator would find no favour.

In a wide and populous district the duties, when conscientiously
performed, were more than mortal stomach could bear unharmed, even
though the paunch were like that of Falstaff, which Dick's was not,
and leaving out of account the temptations which beset such an
official. Dick took to ale-tasting as a jest, though he fulfilled his
duties with a mock gravity that enhanced the fun of the situation.
Keen as was his taste for ale, he had a keener relish for the humour
of the position. Alas! it was joking perilously near to the edge of a
precipice. The last of the Ale-tasters died, a martyr to duty, on the
10th day of October, 1876. _Sic itur ad astra._

A number of curious legends, not lacking in humour, are current in the
Rossendale district. It is said that some of the youths of
Crawshawbooth village were amusing themselves at football on a Sunday
afternoon in the field between Pinner lodge and Sunnyside House. A
gentlemanly personage, dressed in black, approached and stood looking
at them for some time apparently interested in the game of the
Sabbath-breakers. The ball at length rolled to his feet, and, unable,
perhaps, to resist the temptation, he took it in his hand, and gave it
a kick that sent it spinning into the air; but instead of the ball
returning to _terra firma_, it continued to rise until it vanished
from the sight of the gaping rustics.

Turning to look at the stranger who had performed such a marvellous
feat, they espied--what they had not observed before--the cloven hoof
and barbed tail (just visible from underneath the coat) of his Satanic
Majesty! The effect of this unexpected discovery on the onlookers may
be imagined. Had the wall round the field been twelve feet high
instead of four it could hardly have prevented their exit. As for the
cause of their sudden dispersion, he vanished in a blaze of fire, and
the smell of the brimstone fumes produced by his disappearance was
felt in the village for many weeks after.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another story of the same personage is the following: At the corner of
the field between Stacksteads and the railway is a large
irregularly-shaped mound made up of earth, clay and coarse gravel. The
debris of which it is composed has probably been washed down out of
"Hell Clough," a depression in the hills immediately opposite, and
deposited at this place at a remote period of time. But there is a
legend connected with it. It is said that before the river Irwell had
scooped out its present channel through the Thrutch Glen--a narrow
gorge about eighty feet wide, through which the river, the road and
the railway run side by side--the whole of the valley extending thence
up to Bacup foot was covered by a vast sheet of water--a great lake
embanked by the surrounding hills. At Hell Clough it is said that his
Satanic Majesty had a country seat and was accustomed to perform his
ablutions in the lake in question. One day the water, swollen by heavy
rains, and lashed into fury by the wind, overflowed its banks at the
Thrutch, ploughing out a passage through the rock and shale which
hitherto had barred its progress. His Majesty of the cloven foot, who
stood upon the edge of the lake enjoying the storm himself had raised,
began to perceive the sudden withdrawal of the water from his feet.
Divining the cause, he slipped on a large apron, and, hastily filling
it with soil and gravel, made with all speed to repair the breach.
But, just as he reached the place where the mound described is
situated, his apron strings broke, and the mass of rubbish which he
carried fell to the ground, where it has lain to this day.

It is some such tradition of the close proximity of the devil to the
district which has given rise to the saying, quoted by Samuel Bamford:
"There's a fine leet i' th' welkin, as th' witch o' Brandwood said
when th' devil wur ridin' o'er Rossenda."

The "witch o' Brandwood" was probably concerned in the following
incident. It would appear that the intention of the founders of the
old Church at Kirk was to build it on a site at Mitchellfield-nook,
and that the materials for the structure were deposited at that
place--when one morning it was discovered that the whole had been
transported overnight by some unseen power to the hillside on which
the Church stands.

Not to be diverted from their purpose, the inhabitants again conveyed
the materials to the place which they had originally fixed upon, and
appointed a watch to frustrate any further attempts at removal. But
one night as the sentinel slumbered at his post--an enchanted sleep,
probably--the unseen hands had again been busy, with similar results.

A third time the materials were deposited on the chosen site, and, on
this occasion, three of the inhabitants appointed to keep watch and
ward. As these sat toasting their toes at a wood fire they had
kindled, an old lady with a kindly countenance, coming past, saluted
them with a pleasant "good e'en," at the same time offering them each
a share of some refreshment which she carried. This they had no sooner
partaken of, than a profound drowsiness overtook them, ending in a
deep and protracted sleep--from which in the morning they were
aroused by the shouts of the bewildered rustics who came only to find
that the pranks had a third time been repeated. So, yielding to the
decision of a power which was not to be outmanoeuvred, the builders
erected the church on its present site.[11]

[11] A somewhat similar legend exists in connection with the old
churches at Rochdale and Burnley.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reverting again to hand-loom days, and stepping over by Sharneyford
and Tooter Hill--"th' riggin' o' th' world," as Tim Bobbin called
it--the high ridge separating Rossendale from the Todmorden Valley, by
way of Dulesgate (Devil's gate), where Waugh assisted at the poker
weighing--we may encounter some of the finest examples of Lancashire
and Yorkshire border character, their conversation overflowing with
mother-wit and ready repartee. Speaking of some one who had a "good
conceit of himself," said old John Howorth to me; "there's only three
spoonfuls o' wit (sense) i' th' world, and yon mon has gettin' two on'
em!"

One old dame, recounting the struggles of poor folk in the days when
there was plenty of law, but a sad lack of justice--not to speak of
mercy--dealt out to the workers, and describing the kind of men and
their head servants who held the noses of the poor to the grindstone
while they themselves were laying the foundations of big fortunes,
spoke thus:

"Yei, it wur hard work for poor folk i' thoose days. We geet sixpence
a cut for weyving cuts, and in a whool week, working long hours, we
couldna' get through moore nor about nine or ten cuts--for they were
twenty yards long apiece. That would mak' five shillin' a week at
moast; an' when we had finished 'em, we had to carry 'em on our backs
two or three mile to th' taker-in.

"I con remember my owd mon once takin' his cuts in, and he had tramped
through th' weet and snow on a cowd winter's mornin', and when he had
gettin' his cuts passed by th' taker-in, he axed him if he would gi'e
him a penny to buy a penny moufin to eat as he wur goin' back whoam;
but th' taker-in said to him: 'Eh mon! if I wur to gi'e thee a penny
it would be gi'en' thee o' th' profit 'at our maisters get fro' a cut,
(whereas at the time they were probably making a clear guinea by each
of them). They're nearly working at a loss now by every cut yo
weyving. No, it'll never do to gi'e thee pennies in that reckless
fashion, Jone!'

"It wur hard work i' thoose days, I can tell thi', to get porritch and
skim milk twice a day, wi' happen a bit o' bacon on Sundays. Once I
had to go fro' near to Stoodley Pike, across Langfield Moor, wi' my
cuts. It were a raw cowd morning, very early, before it wur gradely
leet. An' when I geet to th' taker-in--eh! an' they wur hard uns,
thoose takers-in!--he says when he seed me:

"'Hillo! are yo here so soon, Betty? Warn't yo fley'd o' meetin' th'
de'il this morning as yo coom across Langfield Moor?'

"'Nowt o' th' soart,' I said, I wur noan feart o' meetin' th' de'il up
o' th' moor, for I knew th' hangmets weel that I'd find th' de'il when
I geet here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Saving habits, to a much greater extent than prevail in the larger
towns, are a characteristic of the working people in these outlying
and semi-rural districts. This is accounted for to some extent by the
absence of temptation to the spending of money, and so the habit of
thrift gains in strength by the daily practice of it; just as the
opposite holds good where the opportunities for squandering money and
the temptation to do so are multiplied.

By reason, also, of the comparative isolation, a more marked
simplicity of character is observable among the people. Rambling with
a friend over the moors above Walsden, we called at a lonely farmhouse
to obtain such refreshments with bread and cheese as the goodwife
might be able to provide. With as much gravity as he could command, my
friend inquired of the damsel who waited on us, at what hour the
theatre opened up there. She hesitated for a moment as though trying
to realize the idea of a theatre, and then with equal gravity and
greater sincerity explained that there was no theatre in their
locality, though occasionally in the schoolroom, some mile and a half
distant, they had Penny Readings in Winter, and at times a Missionary
meeting.

The theatre is a luxury in which they do not care to indulge very
largely, even if they had the opportunity of doing so. It may be that
the matter-of-fact qualities of their minds have been cultivated at
the expense of the imagination, like those of the youth to whom I
lent a copy of the "Pilgrim's Progress," recommending him to read it,
and believing it would interest him. When he brought it back I asked
him how he had enjoyed the book. His answer was scarcely what I
expected, and it was spoken in a contemptuous tone: "Why," said he,
"it's nobbut a dreyam!" One might be justified in coming to the
conclusion that in this youth there was the making of a hard-headed,
practical Lancashire cotton spinner.

But the Lancashire operative class are not all lacking in imagination,
as the next incident will show. Chancing to be in London one evening,
and going along the Strand, I came across two old Lancashire
acquaintances--working men--sauntering in the opposite direction. They
had come up on a three days' cheap trip to view the sights of the
Metropolis. Desiring to be of assistance to them in that direction,
and to make myself agreeable, I invited them to go with me to one of
the theatres. This proposal, however, did not seem to attract
them--the theatre was hardly in their line; so, by way of alternative,
and remembering that they were strong politicians, I suggested that
they should accompany me to the "Coger's Hall," at the bottom of Fleet
Street, and listen to a political discussion. This suggestion they
eagerly accepted, and, strolling along, we shortly found ourselves
snugly ensconsed in the discussion forum, each in an arm-chair, a pint
of stout in a pewter on the table in front of each of us, and long
clay pipes in our mouths. The subject of the evening was a burning
political question, and the discussion went on with great animation. I
saw that my friends were enjoying it immensely; at length, nudging one
of them, I inquired:

"How do you like it, Jim?"

Taking his pipe from between his teeth, his face beaming with a kind
of solemn satisfaction:

"Like it," he replied, "it's same as being i' heaven!"

He had in fact attained to the very acme of enjoyment; comfortably
seated in his chair, enjoying his pipe, his sense of hearing charmed
by the orators' well-turned periods, and, as he expressed it, "he
could sup when he'd a mind!" I have often seen my friends since then,
and I find that that evening spent in the discussion room at Coger's
Hall is marked with a red letter in their memory.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Drufty Ned" was well named, and he had numberless ways of raising the
wind when he wanted a gill with never a bodle to pay for it. One day
he called at Owd Sall o' Croppers, who kept the "Hit or Miss"
beerhouse and sold oatcake baked in Lancashire fashion on a
"bakstone."

"Let's ha' hauve a dozen o' yor oatcakes, Sall," said Ned, as he sat
down by the fireside and leaned his elbows on the well-scrubbed table
in the tap-room.

The cakes were brought. "Bring me a gill o' ale, Sall, while aw warm
mi toes a bit." The ale was tabled, and Ned pretending he was short of
change, hands Sall back two of the oatcakes.

"Here, Sall, take pay for th' ale wi' two o' th' oatcakes." Sall
looked at him dubiously, but took the proffered payment.

Shortly, Ned knocked on the table with his empty pot, and called for
another gill. This was brought, and Ned handed back two more of the
oatcakes in exchange.

A third time the order was given, and shortly, Ned, having finished
both his ale and the cakes, began to clunter out towards the door,
calling out, "Good day, Sall."

"Here!" cried Sall, "tha hasn't paid for th' ale."

"Paid for th' ale," responded Ned, "aw paid for th' ale wi' th'
oatbrade."

"Aw lippen thae did," said Sall a bit moidart, "aw lippen thae did,
but aw want payin' for th' oatcakes then."

"Payin' for th' oatcakes!" replied Ned, looking at the landlady in an
injured way, as though protesting that she wanted to impose upon him,
"payin' for th' oatcakes! Thae's gettin thi oatcakes, hasn't thae?"

"Yai, aw have," responded Sall. "It's queer, but it'll happen be
reet!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Lahee in one of her amusing sketches points out that in East and
South Lancashire, parents sometimes have their male progeny named in
baptism according to the profession or position they should like
them to attain in after life, hence we find such names as the
following applied to people for the most part in humble
circumstances:--"Captain" Duckworth, "Major" Fitton, "Doctor" Hall,
"Squire" Crawshaw, "Lord" Massey, and even "Canon" Ball. To these may
be added "Lord" Tattersall and "Gentleman" Taylor. One aspiring mother
had her hopeful son christened "Washington," but by some mistake the
name in the register got set down as "Washing done"!

       *       *       *       *       *

"What size was it?" the witness was asked when in the witness box
giving evidence.

"It was about th' mickle of a piece of chalk," was the answer.[12]

[12] This is nearly as explicit as the description given by a person
of the hailstones that fell during the thunder-storm. He said that
they varied in size from a shilling to eighteen-pence.

       *       *       *       *       *

In one of the hamlets lying beyond Todmorden, in the Burnley valley,
there was a curious specimen of the Lancashire border character, Hiram
Fielden, who kept a grocer's shop, and dealt also in the other
commodities expected to be inquired for by a village community. In his
younger days Hiram had been a cotton weaver in a mill, but his
ambition was to save a little money, get married, and open a "Badger's
Shop." By the exercise of great frugality, along with the help of the
savings which his wife, Betty, brought him, he achieved his purpose.

He began business in a humble way at first; but gradually as his
customers increased, his business grew, and instead of continuing to
vend treacle from a two-gallon can, he at length ventured on giving an
order for a whole hogshead at once! The arrival of this consignment
created quite a sensation in the village; the like had never been seen
there before, and the urchins who watched the process of unloading
the precious cask, and saw it safely deposited end up in the corner of
the store, smacked their lips as their imagination pictured the
luscious reservoir of sweets. In the course of the day a further
consignment--this time of whitewash brushes--arrived, and Betty,
mounting a chair in the corner, and thence stepping on to the top of
the treacle barrel, was just in the act of hanging the brushes on the
hook in the ceiling, when the barrel end gave way underneath her, and
down she settled gradually up to the arm-pits into the syrupy mass!

Hiram, who was busy at the back of the shop, hearing the crash,
hurried in to ascertain the cause, and stood for a few moments gazing
in consternation at the head of his better-half barely visible above
the barrel edge. What was to be done? Ruin and disgrace and ridicule
stared him in the face, but with great presence of mind he ran to the
shop door, closed it, shot the bolt, and then drew down the window
blind.

Mounting the barrel and securing a footing on its edge, he succeeded,
by the help of a clothes-line which he looped on to the hook overhead,
and which she stoutly grasped, in gradually extricating Betty from her
savoury bath. Carefully he stroked the treacle from her as she rose
ceilingwards, and, that no loss of merchandise might ensue, at the
same time wiping her down with a cloth dipped in a bucket of water;
thus all traces of Betty's misadventure were soon obliterated, and
nobody but themselves was any the wiser.

Hiram, in recounting the circumstance to me, confidentially, after
long years had elapsed, declared that the run on that hogshead was
immense. It was relished by his customers, old and young, and was the
occasion of more oatmeal being consumed in the village than had ever
previously been known, so that what at first appeared to Hiram to be
an irretrievable misfortune, turned out profitable in more ways than
one.

"Eh! but, mon," said Hiram, shaking his head, and with a solemn
countenance, "that hogshead o' treacle wur th' ruination o' me."

"Ruination!" I exclaimed in puzzled surprise. "How do you mean?"

"Well, yo' see, me and our Betty had been wed for three yer, and up to
then we'd had no childer, but hoo began from that time forrud, and
never once stopped till hoo had thirteen! Eh! that hogshead o' treacle
wur t' ruination o' me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr Milner thus describes and explains a curious old Lancashire custom:
"When a young fellow goes courting his sweetheart on a Friday night,
the neighbours come out and ring a frying-pan to scare him away. The
reason of the practice is clear. Friday is the especial night when in
working men's houses the Penates are worshipped with pail and brush,
and a fellow skulking about the place is an intrusion and a hindrance.
In a quiet street the well-understood sound heard, then all the people
rush to their doors, and probably catch a glimpse of the swain who
loves not wisely but too well, darting down a passage or round a
corner, glad to escape with his face unseen!"

"Riding the Stang," or pole, is still common in out-of-the-way
Lancashire villages. It is usually resorted to in those rare instances
where a wife has given her husband a thrashing. The neighbours mount a
boy on a "stang," or pole, and carry him through the streets in the
neighbourhood where the incident has occurred. The procession stops at
intervals, and the boy recites the following doggerel rhymes to the
accompaniment of the drumming of pans and kettles:--

    "Ting, tong to the sign o' the pan!
    She has beat her good man.
    It was neither for boiled nor roast,
    But she up with her fist, an'
    Knocked down mesther, post!"

Some of the older two-storied houses in Bolton at one time were let
out in flats, the upper floor being reached by a flight of about a
dozen or fifteen steps running up outside the gable. These were
generally unprotected by a handrail, and even the landing at the top
was equally unprotected and dangerous. Dick Windle, noted as much for
his reckless character as for his ready wit, was visiting an
acquaintance whose domicile was reached by such a flight of steps as I
have described. They had had a glass or two in the course of the
evening, and, on leaving, Dick's head was none of the clearest; and
although the night was not very dark, yet, emerging from the
gaslighted room, the steps were not easily discernible. Instead of
turning to the right as he came out by the door on to the landing,
Dick strode clean off the landing edge in front of him, and came down
with a crash to the bottom! Happily, except for a severe shaking, he
was unhurt. Gathering himself up, and whilst yet on all fours, he
called out to his friend, who was staring over the landing edge in
consternation at Dick's sudden disappearance: "D--n it, Bill! How mony
mooar steps is there o' this mak?" The prospect of a dozen more of the
same depth before he could reach the street level, might well prompt
the anxious question.

       *       *       *       *       *

Journeying one day to fulfil a professional engagement at Whittingham
Lunatic Asylum near Preston, I arrived at the Junction where
passengers alight to reach the Asylum by the single line of railway
which has been made expressly for the use of that institution.

It was a bleak winter day, the sleet was driving before a nor'-west
wind, and I turned into the waiting-room at the station to warm myself
at the fire until the engine with its two carriages came up the branch
line. I happened to be the only passenger that had come by the train.
As I sat on a chair with my feet on the fender at one side of the
fire, a sturdy middle-aged man joined me, and seated himself also on a
chair on the opposite side.

"Good morning," said I, by way of introduction. He looked intently at
me for a second or two, as if to take stock whether I was a possible
lunatic on my way to the House, and then replied: "Same to yo,"
bending towards the fire and warming his hands.

"I suppose that is the Lunatic Asylum that we can see over yonder,"
jerking my thumb towards the window through which the Asylum buildings
were visible in the distance.

"Yai, it is," he replied, again looking intently in my face.

"There's a lot of mad folk in it, I suppose?"

"Ay, there is," was the answer.

"More than two thousand," I remarked.

"Ay, mooar than two thousand."

Here there was a pause for a minute in our conversation, when he
blurted out with startling suddenness:

"Aw'm one o' th' mad 'uns!"

The information came upon me so unexpectedly, and was conveyed with
such emphasis, and in such gruesome manner, that I could not help an
involuntary start and an instinctive glance towards the waiting-room
door to see whether it was open. Collecting myself, and pushing my
chair back a bit to put a little more distance between us, I resumed:

"You're one o' th' mad 'uns, are you?"

"Ay, aw am."

"You don't look like it, friend," I said.

"Ay, but aw am, though!"

"Well, and how do you happen to be here?" I inquired.

"Why?" he replied, "Aw'm th' asylum poastman. Aw come to meet th'
trains as brings th' poast-bags."

Just then the lilliputian train from the Asylum ran into the siding at
the station, and my mad friend, shouldering the letter-bags that he
had placed at the waiting-room door, got into the lunatic carriage and
I into the other. The engine whistled, and away we sped down the line
towards the abode of sorrow.

There was a pathetic humour in the conversation I had had with "one
o' th' mad 'uns," and my reflections turned upon the varying degrees
of madness that afflict not only the inmates of an asylum, but also we
their more favoured brethren outside its walls.




INDEX


    A

    Ab' o' th' Yate, 3, 18, 101

    Abram, Mr, Historian of Blackburn, 61

    Abram o' Bobs, 91

    Ale-taster of Rossendale, the, 101, 103

    Amen, Little, 99

    Animal food, 66

    Ann o' th' Kiln and Judie, 89

    Apostles' Creed, the, 77

    Aspirate, dropping the, 61, 62, 63

    Astronomer, Crabtree, the, 21

    Asylum, Whittingham Lunatic, 128

    Authors in Lancashire Dialect, 2, 5


    B

    Badger's shop, a, 123

    Bailey, Sir William, 49

    Ball, Canon, 122

    Bamford, Samuel, 112

    Barley Times, 85

    Belmont Churchwardens, 67

    Besom Ben, 3, 16

    Bill o' Jack's, 92

    Blackley, meeting at, 18

    Bobbin, Tim, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12

    Bobbins, thou'rt short o', 49

    Bocking Warp, 99

    Boring for compensation, 73

    Brandwood, witch o', 112

    Brierley Ben, 2, 5, 18, 75

    Bright, John, 47, 48

    Brooks, John, of Sunnyside, 94

    Brooks, Sam, Manchester banker, 94, 95, 96

    Bull-baiting in Rossendale, 83

    Burs-holder, 103


    C

    Chaucer, 4

    Christmas soiree, girl at, 37

    Clare, O. Leigh, Q.C., M.P., 53, 63

    Clegg, Trafford, 5

    Coal strike in Lancashire, 55

    Coger's Hall, 118

    Collier, John, 2, 3, 10, 12

    Consecrating the footpaths, 63

    Co-op. Mills, 69

    Coud an' hungry, 17

    Court Leet, 103

    Court, Halmot, 102

    Crabtree, the astronomer, 21

    Crawshaw, Squire, 122

    Crawshawbooth Sabbath breakers, 110

    Cronje at St Helens, 64

    Cross, Lord, 52


    D

    Daisy year, a, 40

    Derby, Lord, 54

    Devil of a dog, a, 96

    Deyghn Layrocks, 98, 100

    Dialect, antiquity of the Lancashire, 3

    Dick o' owd Sally's, 92

    Dick, Spindle, 101

    Disraeli, Mr Bright on, 48

    District of Lancashire Dialect, choicest, 1, 2

    Doffers, Lancashire Factory, 80

    Dog's tail, cutting off a, 97

    Drufty Ned, 120

    Duckworth, Captain, 122

    Duckworth, Mr, M.P. for Middleton, 54

    Dulesgate, 114


    E

    Eccles and his coachman, 38

    Election questions, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54

    "Elijah," the Oratorio of, 67


    F

    Factory Doffers, 80

    Fair, Kirk, 106

    Fiddler, the old, 16

    Fielden, Hiram, 123

    Fielden, Mr, M.P. for Blackburn, 62

    Fitton, Major, 122

    Fitton's visit to the Earl o' Derby, 20

    Flea and elephant, the, 39

    Foreigners, prejudice against, 74

    Fraser, Dr, Bishop of Manchester, 34

    Free thoughts by a Manchester man, 32

    Friday night courting, 126

    Fry, J. Pease, 53

    Funerals of the working classes, 41


    G

    Gaskell, Rev. W., M.A., on dialect, 4

    Gas-lighting, 79

    Gentleman Taylor, 108, 122

    George, Long, constable of Bacup, 87

    George o' Bob's, 92

    Girl at Christmas soiree, 37

    Gower, 4

    Great Unpaid, the, 107


    H

    Hall, Dr, 122

    Halliday, Thomas, 31

    Halmot Court, 102

    Hampson, R. J., on Quacks, 28

    Handley, Mr, landlord of the "Derby," 57

    Handloom days, in, 99, 114

    Happy Simeon, 99

    Hareholme Mill in Rossendale, 85

    Hargreaves, George, J.P., 93

    Harland, John, 84

    Head-borough, 103

    Hell Clough, 111

    Hit or Miss, 120

    Horace, quoted, 60

    Hornby, Mr, M.P. for Blackburn, 62

    Howorth, John, 114

    Humour as a lever, 73

    Hunchback, diminutive, 98


    I

    Image-maker and Buddha, the, 38

    In handloom days, 99

    Inspection, humours of School, 76, 77

    Insular prejudice, 74

    Irish and Lancashire humour compared, 55

    Isle of Man tripper, 39


    J

    Jammie, Long, brid-stuffer, 19

    Jobber Pilling's feyther, 92

    John's uncle, 42

    Jonson, Ben, 4

    Justice Willes, 61


    K

    Kay, Billy, and his parrot, 19

    Keene, Charles, picture in "Punch," 63

    Kiln and Judie, Ann o' th', 89

    Kirk Fair, 106

    Knot Mill Fair, 76

    Krooger, Owd, 64


    L

    Lahee, Miss, 5, 20, 122

    Lamb, Rev. Robert, 32, 77

    Lancashire character, examples of, 2, 5

    Lancashire Dialect, antiquity of, 3

    Lancashire Factory Doffers, 80

    Lancashire man abroad, the, 74

    Lancashire memories, by Mrs Potter, 35

    Lancashire proverbs, 39

    Landlord of the "Derby," the, 57

    Laycock, Samuel, 5

    Layrocks, Deyghn, 98, 100

    Lectures, Gaskell's, on Lancashire Dialect, 4

    Leyland character, a, 79

    Little Amen, 99

    Lobscouse, Dicky, of Leyland, 79

    Long George, constable of Bacup, 87

    Long Jammie, brid-stuffer, 19

    Lunatic Asylum, Whittingham, 128


    M

    Maister George, 93

    Malaprop, Mrs, 63

    Manchester clergyman and the sick woman, the, 33

    Manchester Court Leet Records, 84

    Manchester Ship Canal, 70

    Massey, Lord, 122

    Memories, Lancashire, by Louise Potter, 35

    Methuselah, Old, 99

    Milestone, the, 58

    Mill, Stuart, 37

    Milner, George, 96, 126

    Mining village, stranger in, 27


    N

    Nab, Rondle o' th', 17

    Names of recognition, 92

    Ned, Drufty, 120

    Nuttall, John, 86


    O

    Old Trafford County cricket match, 24

    Oldham woman and the New Jerusalem, 33

    One o' th' mad 'uns, 129

    Orange-woman and Ben Brierley, 75

    Oratorio of "Elijah," the, 67

    Ormerod, Oliver, 2, 12, 16

    Owd Neddy Fitton's visit to the Earl o' Derby, 20

    Owd Jack's throttle, 17

    Owd Pooter, 64, 66

    Owd Sam and Mr Handley, 56

    Owdham Chap at Old Trafford, th', 24

    Owdham Chap on the tread-mill, th', 23


    P

    Parrot, Billy Kay's, 19

    Pyckin' 'em out, you're, 56

    Pigeon-flyer, the dying, 25

    Pilgrim's Progress, nobbut a dreyam, 118

    Pilling's feyther, Jobber, 92

    Pioneers, Rochdale, 90

    Pooter, Owd, 64, 66

    Porritch powder, 17;
      water, 85

    Postman, Whittingham Lunatic Asylum, 128

    Potter's Memories, Louise, 35

    Power-loom breaking riots of 1826, 86

    Preston House of Correction, 23, 79

    Proverbs, Lancashire, 39

    Put a notice up, 65


    Q

    Quacks, R. J. Hampson on, 28

    Quiet sow, th', 39


    R

    Rachde Felley in London, the, 12, 13, 14

    Recognition, names of, 92

    Riding the Stang, 126

    Riggin' o' th' world, th', 11, 114

    Riots of 1826, power-loom breaking, 86

    Roberts, General, 64

    Robin o' Sceawter's feyther, 17

    Rochdale Pioneers, the, 90

    Rodger, Spanking, 99

    Rondle o' th' Nab's cat, 17

    Rossendale loom breakers, 87

    Rough and enough, 40


    S

    Sall o' Croppers, 120

    Sam, Owd, of Bury, 56

    Samson, Strong, 99

    School Inspection, humours of, 76, 77

    Scotch and Lancashire humour contrasted, 55

    Shakespeare, 4, 9

    Shackleton, Jim, and boring for compensation, 70

    Ship Canal, Manchester, 70

    Shooting or worrying th' Boers, 58

    Simeon, Happy, 99

    Sixteen eggs for a shilling, 65

    Smith, Jack, of Blackburn, 61

    Socialist, a Lancashire, 59

    Sond brid, the, 19

    Spanking Rodger, 95

    Spenser, 4

    Spindle Dick, 101

    Stalybridge man and his hat, 43

    Stang, riding the, 126

    Staton, J. T., 5

    Steam pressure, 64

    Stuart Mill, 37


    T

    Ta'en 'em as they come, 56

    Taker-in, the, 115

    Tattersall, Lord, 122

    Taylor, Gentleman, 108, 122

    Taylor, Richard, the Rossendale ale-taster, 101

    Thrutch, the, 111

    Tim Bobbin, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12

    Tithing-men, 103

    Touching th' moon, 68

    Tramp and the stonebreaker, 58

    Treacle barrel, the, 124

    Tummus and Meary, John Collier's, 2, 10

    Tyldesley collier and his bull-dog, the, 21


    U

    Unpaid, the Great, 107


    V

    Volunteer movement, 47


    W

    Walmsley Fowt, 18

    Walton, Jim, the astronomer, 21

    Ward, Artemus, 16

    Warp, Bocking, 99

    Waugh, Edwin, 2, 5, 16, 17, 37, 91, 114

    Wheelbarrow, collier and, 28

    Whittingham Lunatic Asylum Postman, 128

    Wigan collier and his boy, 45

    Willes, Justice, 61

    Windle, Dick, 127

    Witch o' Brandwood, 112

    Working man going to the Isle of Man, the, 38

    Worrying or shooting th' Boers, 58

    Wycliffe, 4


    Y

    You're pykin' 'em out, 56

    Young grindlestones, 91


    PRINTED BY
    TURNBULL AND SPEARS,
    EDINBURGH




Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent and archaic punctuation and spelling retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lancashire Humour, by Thomas Newbigging

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LANCASHIRE HUMOUR ***

***** This file should be named 39968.txt or 39968.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/9/6/39968/

Produced by sp1nd, Mebyon, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Sons, by George Manville Fenn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The King's Sons

Author: George Manville Fenn

Illustrator: T.H. Robinson

Release Date: May 4, 2007 [EBook #21315]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S SONS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





The King's Sons, by George Manville Fenn.

________________________________________________________________________

This is a very short book, and it does not contain any of the usual
nail-biting Fenn-style situations.  But it is very good at what it does,
which is to tell a story about King Ethelwulf of Wessex and his four
sons, each of whom in turn became King.

The story concentrates on the youngest of the sons, Alfred, who became
known as Alfred the Great during his reign.  The four boys have a tutor,
Father Swythe, but only Alfred is interested in what the monk has to
teach.  At this point we get a very interesting lesson on how the great
illustrated manuscripts were made, how the ink and the colours were
made, and how the pens and brushes were made.

Father Swythe later became Bishop of Winchester, and was known as
Swithun.  He was canonised, and somehow there has grown a legend that if
it rains on Saint Swithun's day it will rain for forty days after that.
He is portrayed as rather a portly monk in this story, but his effigy in
Winchester Cathedral shows him as a very slight man.  There is another
story about him which makes him out to be rather a small man, who
couldn't reach the key-hole of the cathedral, which obligingly slid down
for him.  Anyway, the story is a good one, and you will enjoy it.

This website is called Athelstane, after Alfred's grandson, so we were
interested to transcribe this story.  NH

________________________________________________________________________

THE KING'S SONS, BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.



CHAPTER ONE.

SONS OF THE KING.

The sun shone down hotly on the hill-side, and that hill was one of a
range of smooth rolling downs that ought to have been called ups and
downs, from the way they seemed to rise and fall like the sea on a fine
calm day.

Not quite, for at such a time the sea looks as blue as the sky above it,
while here on this particular hot day, though the sky was as blue as a
sapphire stone, the hills were of a beautiful soft green, the grass
being short and soft, and as velvety as if Nature had been all over it
regularly with her own particular mowing-machine.

But the only mowing that had been done to that grass was by the cropping
teeth of the many flocks of sheep whose fleeces dotted the downs with
soft white where they nibbled away, watched by the shepherds in their
long smock frocks with turn-down collars and pleatings and gatherings on
breast and back, and slit up at the sides from the bottom so as to give
the men's legs room to move freely when they ran after a restive sheep
to hook him with the long crook they carried and bring him kicking and
struggling by hook or by crook to the grass.

It was just over a thousand years ago, and, in spite of all the changes
fashion has made, plenty of shepherds and farm labourers still wear the
simple old Saxon dress then worn by King Ethelwulf's serfs, though
without the girdle worn then.

There were four boys on the steepest slope of that hill-side--four
fair-haired, sun-browned, hearty-looking boys--and they wore smock
frocks, belted in at the waist, of fine, soft, woollen material, woven
out of the fleeces of the sheep; for they were King's sons, the sons of
the King whose flocks were feeding on the hill-side in Berkshire, where
he had his Court.

It was as peaceful there as it was soft and beautiful; for though news
came from time to time of the cruel acts of the fierce Norsemen who had
come across the sea in their great row and sailing galleys full of
fighting-men, they were far away from the King's home, so that Queen
Osburga felt no anxiety about her boys being out on the downs at play,
enjoying themselves and growing strong.  This she loved to see; though,
being a very learned woman herself in days when noble people thought no
shame to have to say: "I cannot read or write," she sighed to find how
very little her four sons cared for such things as gave her delight.

They all loved to be out in the open air along with Cerda, the Saxon
jarl, one of the King's chief fighting-men, who urged them to learn how
to use the broadsword.  After setting one of the men to make swords for
the boys--not of hard cutting steel, but of good tough ash-wood--and
then matching them two against two, he would sit and roar with laughter
at the blows they gave and took.

"Well done!  At him again!" he cried.  "Another wound; but it will not
bleed."

It was Cerda, too, who had bows and arrows made for the boys, whilst
King Ethelwulf would look on, sometimes smiling and sometimes sighing,
for he cared nothing for these things.

"But we must have fighting-men, Swythe," he said, to a little plump,
rosy-looking monk in a long gown held tightly to his waist by a knotted
rope, which cut in a good way, for the monk was very fat.

"Oh, but fighting's bad, sir, very bad," said the monk, passing one of
his hands round and round over his shining, closely-shaven crown.

"Very bad," said King Ethelwulf.  "I hate it; but you know what the
Danes have done to so many of your holy house--killing, burning, and
carrying off everything that is good."

The monk screwed up his face, shook his head, and sighed, while the rosy
little man looked so droll that the King smiled.

"Look here, Swythe," he said, "suppose a horde of the savage wretches
came up here to plunder my pleasant home, what would you do?"

"Hah!" said the monk.  "I am a man of peace, sir; I should run away."

"And leave the Queen and my boys and me to be killed or taken
prisoners?"

"Hah!  No," said the monk.  "I couldn't do that.  I'm afraid I should
take the biggest staff I could lift--or a sword--or an axe--and--and if
either of the wretches tried to touch our good Queen or either of my
dear boys I should hit him as hard as ever I could."

"With the club?" said the King.

"No; I should strike him down with the axe, sir."

"But you might kill him, Swythe."

"And if I did, sir," said the little monk fiercely, "it would be a good
thing too; for these Norsemen are wicked pagans, come to kill and slay."

"You see, we must have fighting-men, Swythe," said the King; and then he
turned to the Queen, who was listening to what they said.

"Hah! yes, sir," said the monk, with a sigh.  "I suppose we must; and it
does my heart good to see how clever the young Princes are with sword
and bow; but they spend too much time learning to fight.  If they would
only spend half the time learning with me!"

"Yes, it would be good," said Queen Osburga sadly.

"But they don't," continued the monk.  "There's only young Alured--
Alfred, as you call him--who will learn at all, and he is nearly as idle
as his brothers."

"You cannot say that they are idle," said the Queen, smiling gently.

"Well, perhaps not idle, my daughter," said the monk, shaking his head,
"because they do work hard to learn what Jarl Cerda teaches them."

"Yes," said King Ethelwulf, "they are apt to learn how to fight; but you
must make them learned, as kings should be, so as to rule wisely and
well when the Danes have killed me and they are called upon to reign."

"The Danes never shall kill you, sir," cried the little monk fiercely,
"so long as I can stand in their way."

The little group now separated, for the King and Queen had many duties
to perform in connection with state affairs, and the little monk had to
prepare the lessons for the boys.

And that's how matters were on that bright sunny day when King
Ethelwulf's sons lay out on the steep hill-side--Bald, Bert, Red, and
Fred--four as crisp and tongue-tripping names as four bright Saxon
English boys could own, but each with the addition of Athel or Ethel
before, except the youngest, in whose name it shortened into Al; and
these were their titles, because each was a Prince.



CHAPTER TWO.

"BOYS WILL BE BOYS."

One of the boys' amusements had been for one to shoot an arrow as high
up as he could, and for his brothers to follow and try and hit the first
one sent.  Fine practice this in marksmanship, but unsatisfactory and
tiring after a few tries, for the arrows flew far, and this time they
had brought no young serfs' sons to retrieve the arrows, one of which
took a long time to find.

But it was found at last, just as the head of a man appeared above the
distant ridge; and the boys stopped to look, the head being followed by
the shoulders and breast of the man, while behind him there was a fringe
of something bright and shimmering in the sunshine.

The next minute the boys began to run, for they saw that the object
first seen was a mounted man, and what followed the heads of spears
borne by a party of quite a hundred men, whose leader had been seen
first owing to his being mounted upon an active little horse.

"Where's Cerda going?" shouted one of the boys.

"There's a fight somewhere," said another.

And the other two joined in, crying together:

"Let's go and see."

So, in a state of wild excitement and wonder that they had not heard the
news of danger before, the boys raced to head off the body of armed men,
the first up being greeted by the big bluff leader with a cheery shout.

"What now?  What now?" he cried.  "Have you boys come to tell us that we
are too late, and that the enemy are all slain?  Who was it found the
Norsemen's ship?"

"Then the Danes have landed?" cried the eldest boy excitedly.

"Yes," cried his brother.  "I knew that was it."

"Yes, that's it, boy," said the leader, dragging at his horse's head,
for the animal was impatient to go on.

"Where are they?" cried the youngest boy, with his cheeks flushing and
eyes sparkling.

"A day's journey away, my boy.  The people over Farringdon way have
asked for help, and the King sends me."

"That's right," cried the boy who had last spoken.  "We'll go with you."

The leader smiled and shook his head, and the band of fine-looking,
picked men indulged in a hearty laugh.

"What are you mocking and gibing at?" cried the youngest boy fiercely.
"Do you think that because I and my brothers are young we cannot fight?"

"Yes," cried the eldest brother; "we can shoot an arrow with any of you.
Pick out your four best men, Jarl Cerda, and we'll shoot against them."

"Yes," said another.  "You know we can shoot well."

"Do I not?" said the jarl; "for I taught you."

"Yes, yes; they can all shoot well," came in concert.

"Oh, yes, they can shoot," said the leader; "but I have no time to prove
it."

"Of course not," cried Alfred.  "Never mind that.  Lead on."

"I'm afraid we should never catch the Danes if you boys came," said the
jarl solemnly.

"Why?" cried Bald, the eldest.

"Yes, why shouldn't we?" cried Ethelred.

"Don't ask him," said Alfred, frowning.

"Why?"

"Look at his eyes and the corners of his mouth.  He's laughing at us."

The big jarl's shoulders began to shake, and his lids half-closed in his
mirth, while the eyes of all four boys flashed in their anger.

"Why, of course I'm laughing, my boys," he said; "but it's not out of a
desire to mock at you.  I know you, my brave little fellows, and I hope
to come back safe, and to see you all grow up to stark men who will deal
well with the Norsemen.  But you must wait a bit."

"No, no," cried Alfred.  "We can stand back and shoot."

"So can the Danes, my boy; and their arrows are sharp."

"But we can shoot sharper and quicker than they," said Ethelred.  "Oh,
do take us, Jarl Cerda."

"No, my boy," said the stout Saxon noble firmly; "I cannot take you.
The King stood by and picked out my men, and he said I was to take these
and no more.  Would you have me give pain to our good Queen Osburga by
breaking the King's commands?"

"No," said Alfred, with a quick, old-fashioned look.  "We cannot do
that, boys."

"Come, that's bravely spoken, Alfred, boy; I like that," said the jarl,
leaning down from his horse to pat the youngest boy on the shoulder.
"Look here, if I come back safely after beating the Danes I'll bring you
one of their winged helmets for a prize."

"You will?" cried Alfred.

"I promise you I will, my boy," cried the big Saxon noble, "and trophies
for your brothers too.--There, we must go on.  Good-bye, my brave boys.
Give them a shout, my lads."

The men waved sword and spear in the air as they marched off and Alfred
and his brothers stood watching them till the last twinkling spear had
disappeared in the distance, and then the boys turned away with a sigh.

"Oh, I wish I was a man!" said Alfred sadly.

"No use to wish," said the next brother.  "Here, let's go on down the
stream to get some fish."

The disappointment was soon forgotten, and the boys dashed off downhill
as hard as they could go, neither of them hearing a shout, nor seeing
the little monk come panting up, to stand gazing ruefully after them and
wiping the great drops of perspiration off his face and head.

"Oh, dear!" he said; "it's a fine thing to be young and strong, and--"

He paused for a few moments to look down at his plump proportions.

"--And light," he added sadly.  "I can't run as they do."

He stood perfectly still as he spoke, watching the deep crease in the
valley, whose bottom was hidden by clumps of willow and beds of reeds
with their dark purply waving blooms.

"I suppose I must go after them," he sighed.  "What can they want down
there?"

The little monk sighed again and then started off to follow the boys,
trying hard to walk slowly and steadily; but it was all in vain.  The
hill-side sloped very steeply to the broad bed of willows and reeds far
below, making the way very bad for so heavy and inactive a man.  Worse
still: walking over the short grass in the hot sun had made the bottoms
of the monk's sandals as slippery as glass, and so it was that before he
had gone far down the slope he began to talk to himself, at first
slowly--then quickly--then in a loud excited way--and lastly he uttered
a shout and a cry for help.

"Here," he said, at first, "I want to go down slowly.  It's too hot to
walk fast.  Steady!  Why, I am going faster!"

Then there was a minute's pause, and the monk cried excitedly:

"I don't want to run."  Then: "Oh, dear me, however am I to stop
myself?"  And directly after: "Oh, do stop me, somebody, or I shall be
broken all to bits."  And lastly: "Here, help, help, help!"

Then there was a loud crashing sound, some water flew up, the monk
uttered a final "Oh!" and lay perfectly still, listening, for all at
once a familiar voice cried:

"Oh, come here, quick!  A sheep has gone plosh into the pool."

Boys were as much boys then as they are now, for directly after these
words were uttered Alfred--the Little then--came hurrying as fast as the
water would let him wade--splash, splash, splash!--from where he and his
brothers had been busily making a dam across the little stream to turn
the rushing water aside into another channel so as to leave the
unfortunate trout helpless and ready for capture, and as soon as he
caught sight of his teacher lying perfectly still he burst into a fit of
hearty laughter.

"Come and look!  Come and look!" he shouted.

His brothers wanted no further telling, but came splashing up out of the
stream to the open shallow muddy bed where the reeds grew, and as soon
as they saw the monk's condition they began to indulge in a bare-legged
triumphal war-dance, shrieking with laughter the while.

"Bad boys; bad, thoughtless, wicked boys!" grunted Father Swythe; but he
lay perfectly still with arms and legs spread apart as far as they would
go.

"Why don't you stand up and walk out?" cried Fred, at last, taking
compassion on his tutor's awkward plight.

"Because I'm so heavy, boy: I should sink."

"Oh, no.  It isn't deep there.  I've often waded about there to look for
moorhens' nests."

"Yes, my boy; but you're young and light.  I'm very heavy."

"Yes," cried one of the others, in high delight; "there's an arrow depth
of water where you are, and quite a bow length of thick mud under that."

"Oh, dear!" groaned the monk; "don't laugh at me, my boys.  Can't you
help me out?"

"Yes, I'll get you out," cried Alfred, and he waded towards his
unfortunate tutor, trampling the reeds down with his bare feet, but
sinking in up to his knees at every step.

"Mind you don't 