yvn'latt who is an invalid. They live in the old Jacobs
house with the Whites."

Among the friends whom Mercy thus met was a man who was destined to
exercise almost as powerful an influence as Stephen White over her life.
This was Parson Dorrance.

Parson Dorrance had in his youth been settled as a Congregationalist
minister. But his love of literature and of science was even stronger than
his love of preaching the gospel; and, after a very few years, he accepted
a position as professor in a small college, in a town only four miles
distant from the village in which Mercy had come to live. This was
twenty-five years ago. Parson Dorrance was now fifty-five years old. For a
quarter of a century, his name had been the pride, and his hand had been
the stay, of the college. It had had presidents of renown and professors
of brilliant attainments; but Parson Dorrance held a position more
enviable than all. Few lives of such simple and steadfast heroism have
ever been lived. Few lives have ever so stamped the mark of their
influence on a community. In the second year of his ministry, Mr. Dorrance
had married a very beautiful and brilliant woman. Probably no two young
people ever began married life with a fairer future before them than
these. Mrs. Dorrance was as exceptionally clever and cultured a person as
her husband; and she added to these rare endowments a personal beauty
which is said by all who knew her in her girlhood to have been marvellous.
But, as is so often the case among New England women of culture, the body
had paid the cost of the mind's estate; and, after the birth of her first
child, she sank at once into a hopeless invalidism,--an invalidism all the
more difficult to bear, and to be borne with, that it took the shape of
distressing nervous maladies which no medical skill could alleviate. The
brilliant mind became almost a wreck, and yet retained a preternatural
restlessness and activity. Many regarded her condition as insanity, and
believed that Mr. Dorrance erred in not giving her up to the care of those
making mental disorders a specialty. But his love and patience were
untiring. When her mental depression and suffering reached such a stage
that she could not safely see a human face but his, he shut himself up
with her in her darkened room till the crisis had passed. There were times
when she could not close her eyes in sleep unless he sat by her side,
holding her hand in his, and gently stroking it. He spent weeks of nights
by her bedside in this way. At any hour of the day, a summons might come
from her; and, whatever might be his engagement, it was instantly laid
aside,--laid aside, too, with cheerfulness and alacrity. At times, all his
college duties would be suspended on her account; and his own specialties
of scientific research, in which he was beginning to win recognition even
from the great masters of science in Europe, were very early laid aside
for ever. It must have been a great pang to him,--this relinquishment of
fame, and of what is dearer to the true scientific man than all fame, the
joys of discovery; but no man ever heard from his lips an allusion to the
sacrifice. The great telescope, with which he had so many nights swept the
heavens, still stood in his garden observatory; but it was little used
except for recreation, and for the pleasure and instruction of his boy.
Yet no one would have dreamed, from the hearty joy with which he used it
for these purposes, that it had ever been to him the token and the
instrument of the great hope of his heart. The resolute cheer of this
man's life pervaded the whole atmosphere of his house. Spite of the
perpetual shadow of the invalid's darkened room, spite of the inevitable
circumscribing of narrow means, Parson Dorrance's cottage was the
pleasantest house in the place, was the house to which all the
townspeople took strangers with pride, and was the house which strangers
never forgot. There was always a new book, or a new print, or a new
flower, or a new thought which the untiring mind had just been shaping;
and there were always and ever the welcome and the sympathy of a man who
loved men because he loved God, and who loved God with an affection as
personal in its nature as the affection with which he loved a man.

Year after year, classes of young men went away from this college, having
for four years looked on the light of this goodness. Said I not well that
few lives have ever been lived which have left such a stamp on a
community? No man could be so gross that he would utterly fail to feel its
purity, no man so stupid that he could not see its grandeur of
self-sacrifice; and to souls of a fibre fine enough to be touched to the
quick by its exaltation, it was-a kindling fire for ever.

In the twenty-seventh year of her married life, and near the end of the
twenty-fifth year of her confinement to her room, Mrs. Dorrance died. For
a few months after her death, her husband seemed like a man suddenly
struck blind in the midst of familiar objects. He seemed to be groping his
way, to have lost all plan of daily life, so tremendous was the change
involved in the withdrawal of this perpetual burden. Just as he was
beginning to recover the natural tone of his mind, and to resume his old
habits of work, his son sickened and died. The young man had never been
strong: he had inherited his mother's delicacy of constitution, and her
nervous excitability as well; but he had rare qualities of mind, and gave
great promise as a scholar. The news of his death was a blow to every
heart that loved his father. "This will kill the Parson," was said by
sorrowing voices far and near. On the contrary, it seemed to be the very
thing which cleared the atmosphere of his whole life, and renewed his
vigor and energy. He rose up from the terrible grief more majestic than
ever, as some grand old tree, whose young shoots and branches have been
torn away by fierce storms, seems to lift its head higher than before, and
to tower in its stripped loneliness above all its fellows. All the loving
fatherhood of his nature was spent now on the young people of his town;
and, by young people, I mean all between the ages of four and twenty.
There was hardly a baby that did not know Parson Dorrance, and stretch out
its arms to him; there was hardly a young man or a young woman who did not
go to him with troubles or perplexities. You met him, one day, drawing a
huge sledful of children on the snow; another day, walking in the centre
of a group of young men and maidens, teaching them as he walked. They all
loved him as a comrade, and reverenced him as a teacher. They wanted him
at their picnics; and, whenever he preached, they flocked to hear him. It
was a significant thing that his title of Professor was never heard. From
first to last, he was always called "Parson Dorrance;" and there were few
Sundays on which he did not preach at home or abroad. It was one of the
forms of his active benevolence. If a poor minister broke down and needed
rest, Parson Dorrance preached for him, for one month or for three, as the
case required. If a little church were without a pastor and could not find
one, or were in debt and could not afford to hire one, it sent to ask
Parson Dorrance to supply the pulpit; and he always went. Finally, not
content with these ordinary and established channels for preaching the
gospel, he sought out for himself a new one. About eight miles from the
village there was a negro settlement known as "The Cedars." It was a wild
place. Great outcropping ledges of granite, with big boulders toppling
over, and piled upon each other, and all knotted together by the gnarled
roots of ancient cedar-trees, made the place seem like ruins of old
fortresses. There were caves of great depth, some of them with two
entrances, in which, in the time of the fugitive slave law, many a poor
hunted creature had had safe refuge. Besides the cedar-trees, there were
sugar-maples and white birches; and the beautiful rock ferns grew all over
the ledges in high waving tufts, almost as luxuriantly as if they were in
the tropics; so that the spot, wild and fierce as it was, had great
beauty. Many of the fugitive slaves had built themselves huts here: some
lived in the caves. A few poor and vicious whites had joined them,
intermarried with them, and from these had gradually grown up a band of as
mongrel, miserable vagabonds as is often seen. They were the terror of the
neighborhood. Except for their supreme laziness, they would have been as
dangerous as brigands; for they were utter outlaws. No man cared for them;
and they cared for no man. Parson Dorrance's heart yearned over these
poor Ishmaelites; and he determined to see if they were irreclaimable. The
first thing that his townsmen knew of his plan was his purchase of several
acres of land near "The Cedars." He bought it very cheap, because land in
that vicinity was held to be worthless for purposes of cultivation. Unless
the crops were guarded night and day, they were surreptitiously harvested
by foragers from "The Cedars." Then it was found out that Parson Dorrance
was in the habit of driving over often to look at his new property.
Gradually, the children became used to his presence, and would steal out
and talk to him. Then he carried over a small microscope, and let them
look through it at insects; and before long there might have been seen, on
a Sunday afternoon, a group of twenty or thirty of the outcasts gathered
round the Parson, while he talked to them as he had talked to the
children. Then he told them that, if they would help, he would build a
little house on his ground, and put some pictures and maps in it for them,
and come over every Sunday and talk to them; and they set to work with a
will. Very many were the shrugs and smiles over "Parson Dorrance's Chapel
at 'The Cedars.'" But the chapel was built; and the Parson preached in it
to sometimes seventy-five of the outlaws. The next astonishment of the
Parson's friends was on finding him laying out part of his new land in a
nursery of valuable young fruit-trees and flowering shrubs. Then they
said,--

"Really, the Parson is mad! Does he think he has converted all those
negroes, so that they won't steal fruit?" And, when they met the Parson,
they laughed at him. "Come, come, Parson," they said, "this is carrying
the thing a little too far, to trust a fruit orchard over there by 'The
Cedars.'"

Parson Dorrance's eyes twinkled.

"I know the boys better than you do," he replied. "They will not steal a
single pear."

"I'd like to wager you something on that," said the friend.

"Well, I couldn't exactly take such a wager," answered the Parson,
"because you see I know the boys won't steal the fruit."

Somewhat vexed at the obstinacy of the Parson's faith, his friend
exclaimed, "I'd like to know how you can know that beforehand?"

Parson Dorrance loved a joke.

"Neighbor," said he, "I wish I could in honor have let you wager me on
that. I've given the orchard to the boys. The fruit's all their own."

This was the man whom Mercy Philbrick met early in her first summer at
Penfield. She had heard him preach twice, and had been so greatly
impressed by his words and by his face that she longed very much to know
him. She had talked with Stephen about him, but had found that Stephen did
not sympathize at all in her enthusiasm. "The people over at Danby are all
crazy about him, I think," said Stephen. "He is a very good man no doubt,
and does no end of things for the college boys, that none of the other
professors do. But I think he is quixotic and sentimental; and all this
stuff about those niggers at the Cedars is moonshine. They'd pick his very
pocket, I daresay, any day; and he'd never suspect them. I know that lot
too well. The Lord himself couldn't convert them."

"Oh, Stephen! I think you are wrong," replied Mercy. "Parson Dorrance is
not sentimental, I am sure. His sermons were clear and logical and
terse,--not a waste word in them; and his mouth and chin are as strong as
an old Roman's."

Stephen looked earnestly at Mercy. "Mercy," said he, "I wonder if you
would love me better if I were a preacher, and could preach clear,
logical, and terse sermons?"

Mercy was impatient. Already the self-centring of Stephen's mind, his
instant reverting from most trains of thought to their possible bearing on
her love for him, had begun to irritate her. It was so foreign to her own
unconscious, free-souled acceptance and trust.

"Stephen," she exclaimed, "I wish you wouldn't say such things. Besides
seeming to imply a sort of distrust of my love for you, they are
illogical; and you know there is nothing I hate like bad logic."

Stephen made no reply. The slightest approach to a disagreement between
Mercy and himself gave him great pain and a sense of terror; and he took
refuge instantly behind his usual shield of silence. This also was foreign
to Mercy's habit and impulse. When any thing went wrong, it was Mercy's
way to speak out honestly; to have the matter set in all its lights, until
it could reach its true one. She hated mystery; she hated reticence; she
hated every thing which fell short of full and frank understanding of each
other.

"Oh, Stephen!" she used to say often, "it is bad enough for us to be
forced into keeping things back from the world. Don't let us keep any
thing back from each other."

Poor Mercy! the days were beginning to be hard for her. Her face often
wore a look of perplexed thought which was very new to it. Still she never
wavered for a moment in her devotion to Stephen. If she had stood
acknowledged before all the world as his wife, she could not have been any
more single-hearted and unquestioning in her loyalty.

It was at a picnic in which the young people of both Danby and Penfield
had joined that Mercy met Parson Dorrance. No such gathering was ever
thought complete without the Parson's presence. Again and again one might
hear it said in the preliminary discussion: "But we must find out first
what day Parson Dorrance can go. It won't be any fun without him!"

Until Mercy came, Stephen White had rarely been asked to the pleasurings
of the young people in Penfield. There was a general impression that he
did not care for things of that sort. His manner was wrongly interpreted,
however: it was really only the constraint born of the feeling that he was
out of his place, or that nobody wanted him. He watched in silent wonder
the cordial way in which, it seemed to him, that Mercy talked with
everybody, and made everybody feel happy.

"Oh, Mercy, how can you!" he would exclaim: "I feel so dumb, even while I
am talking the fastest!"

"Why, so do I, Stephen," said Mercy. "I am often racking my brains to
think what I shall say next. Half the people I meet are profoundly
uninteresting to me; and half of the other half paralyze me at first
sight, and I feel like such a hypocrite all the time; but, oh, what a
pleasure it is to talk with the other quarter!"

"Yes," sighed Stephen, "you look so happy and absorbed sometimes that it
makes me feel as if you had forgotten me altogether."

"Silly boy!" laughed Mercy. "Do you want me to prove to you by a long face
that I am remembering you?--Darling," she added, "at those very times when
you see me seem so absorbed and happy in company, I am most likely
thinking about the last time you looked into my face, or the next time you
will."

And for once Stephen was satisfied.

The picnic at which Mercy met Parson Dorrance had taken place on a
mountain some six miles south-west of Penfield. This mountain was the
western extremity of the range of which I have before spoken; and at its
base ran the river which made the meadow-lands of Penfield and Danby so
beautiful. Nowhere in America is there a lovelier picture than these
meadow-lands, seen from the top of this mountain which overhangs them. The
mountain is only about twenty-five hundred feet high: therefore, one loses
no smallest shade of color in the view; even the difference between the
green of broom-corn and clover records itself to the eye looking down from
the mountain-top. As far as one can see to northward the valley stretches
in bands and belts and spaces of varied tints of green. The river winds
through it in doubling curves, and looks from the height like a line of
silver laid in loops on an enamelled surface. To the east and the west
rise the river terraces, higher and higher, becoming, at last, lofty and
abrupt hills at the horizon.

When Parson Dorrance was introduced to Mercy, she was alone on a spur of
rock which jutted out from the mountain-side and overhung the valley. She
had wandered away from the gay and laughing company, and was sitting
alone, absorbed and almost saddened by the unutterable beauty of the
landscape below. Stephen had missed her, but had not yet dared to go in
search of her. He imposed on himself a very rigid law in public, and never
permitted himself to do or say or even look any thing which could suggest
to others the intimacy of their relations. Mercy sometimes felt this so
keenly that she reproached him. "I can't see why you should think it
necessary to avoid me so," she would say. "You treat me exactly as if I
were only a common acquaintance."

"That is exactly what I wish to have every one believe you to be, Mercy,"
Stephen would reply with emphasis. "That is the only safe course. Once let
people begin to associate our names together, and there is no limit to the
things they would say. We cannot be too careful. That is one thing you
must let me be the judge of, dear. You cannot understand it as I do. So
long as I am without the right or the power to protect you, my first duty
is to shield you from any or all gossip linking our names together."

Mercy felt the justice of this; and yet to her there seemed also a sort
of injustice involved in it. She felt stung often, and wounded, in spite
of all reasoning with herself that she had no cause to do so, that Stephen
was but doing right. So inevitable and inextricable are pains and dilemmas
when once we enter on the paths of concealment.

Parson Dorrance was introduced to Mercy by Mrs. Hunter, a young married
woman, who was fast becoming her most intimate friend. Mrs. Hunter's
father had been settled as the minister of a church in Penfield, in the
same year that Parson Dorrance had taken his professorship in Danby, and
the two men had been close friends from that day till the day of Mr.
Adams's death. Little Lizzy Adams had been Parson Dorrance's pet when she
lay in her cradle. He had baptized her; and, when she came to woman's
estate, he had performed the ceremony which gave her in marriage to Luke
Hunter, the most promising young lawyer in the county.

She had always called Parson Dorrance her uncle, and her house in Penfield
was his second home. It had been Mrs. Hunter's wish for a long time that
he should see and know her new friend, Mercy. But Mercy was very shy of
seeing the man for whom she felt such reverence, and had steadily refused
to meet him. It was therefore with a certain air of triumphant
satisfaction that Mrs. Hunter led Parson Dorrance to the rock where Mercy
was sitting, and exclaimed,--

"There, Uncle Dorrance! here she is!"

Parson Dorrance did not wait for any farther introduction; but; holding
out both his hands to Mercy, he said in a deep, mellow voice, and with a
tone which had a benediction in it,--

"I am very glad to see you, Mrs. Philbrick. My child Lizzy here has been
telling me about you for a long time. You know I'm the same as a father to
her; so you can't escape me, if you are going to be her friend."

Mercy looked up half-shamefacedly and half-archly, and replied,--

"It was not that I wanted to escape you; but I wanted you to escape me."
She perceived that the Parson had been told of her refusals to meet him.
Then they all sat down again on the jutting rock; and Mercy, leaning
forward with her hands clasped on her knees, fixed her eyes on Parson
Dorrance's face, and drank in every word that he said. He had a rare
faculty of speaking with the greatest simplicity, both of language and
manner. It was impossible not to feel at ease in his presence. It was
impossible not to tell him all that he asked. Before you knew it, you were
speaking to him of your own feelings, tastes, the incidents of your life,
your plans and purposes, as if he were a species of father confessor. He
questioned you so gently, yet with such an air of right; he listened so
observantly and sympathetically. He did not treat Mercy Philbrick as a
stranger; for Mrs. Hunter had told him already all she knew of her
friend's life, and had showed him several of Mercy's poems, which had
surprised him much by their beauty, and still more by their condensation
of thought. They seemed to him almost more masculine than feminine; and
he had unconsciously anticipated that in seeing Mercy he would see a woman
of masculine type. He was greatly astonished. He could not associate this
slight, fair girl, with a child's honesty and appeal in her eyes, with the
forceful words he had read from her pen. He pursued his conversation with
her eagerly, seeking to discover the secret of her style, to trace back
the poetry from its flower to its root. It was an astonishment to Mercy to
find herself talking about her own verses with this stranger whom she so
reverenced. But she felt at once as if she had sat at his feet all her
life, and had no right to withhold any thing from her master.

"I suppose, Mrs. Philbrick, you have read the earlier English poets a
great deal, have you not?" he said. "I infer so from the style of some of
your poems."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Mercy, in honest vehemence. "I have read hardly any
thing, Mr. Dorrance. I know Herbert a little; but most of the old English
poets I have never even seen. I have never lived where there were any
books till now."

"You love Wordsworth, I hope," he said inquiringly.

Mercy turned very red, and answered in a tone of desperation, "I've tried
to. Mr. Allen said I must. But I can't. I don't care any thing about him."
And she looked at the Parson with the air of a culprit who has confessed a
terrible misdemeanor.

"Ah," he replied, "you have not then reached the point in the journey at
which one sees him. It is only a question of time: one comes of a sudden
into the presence of Wordsworth, as a traveller finds some day, upon a
well-known road, a grand cathedral, into which he turns aside and
worships, and wonders how it happens that he never before saw it. You will
tell me some day that this has happened to you. It is only a question of
time."

Just as Parson Dorrance pronounced the last words, they were echoed by a
laughing party who had come in search of him. "Yes, yes, only a question
of time," they said; "and it is our time now, Parson. You must come with
us. No monopoly of the Parson allowed, Mrs. Hunter," and they carried him
off, joining hands around him and singing the old college song, "Gaudeamus
igitur."

Stephen, who had joined eagerly in the proposal to go in search of the
Parson, remained behind, and made a sign to Mercy to stay with him.
Sitting down by her side, he said gloomily,--

"What were you talking about when we came up? Your face looked as if you
were listening to music."

"About Wordsworth," said Mercy. "Parson Dorrance said such a beautiful
thing about him. It was like music, like far off music," and she repeated
it to Stephen. "I wonder if I shall ever reach that cathedral," she added.

"Well, I've never reached it," said Stephen, "and I'm a good deal older
than you. I think two thirds of Wordsworth's poetry is imbecile,
absolutely imbecile."

Mercy was too much under the spell of Parson Dorrance's recent words to
sympathize in this; but she had already learned to avoid dissent from
Stephen's opinions, and she made no reply. They were sitting on the edge
of a great fissure in the mountain. Some terrible convulsion must have
shaken the huge mass to its centre, to have made such a rift. At the
bottom ran a stream, looking from this height like little more than a
silver thread. Shrubs and low flowering things were waving all the way
down the sides of the abyss, as if nature had done her best to fill up the
ugly wound. Many feet below them, on a projecting rock, waved one little
white blossom, so fragile it seemed as if each swaying motion in the
breeze must sever it from the stem.

"Oh, see the dainty, brave little thing!" exclaimed Mercy. "It looks as if
it were almost alone in space."

"I will get it for you," said Stephen; and, before Mercy could speak to
restrain him, he was far down the precipice. With a low ejaculation of
terror, Mercy closed her eyes. She would not look on Stephen in such
peril. She did not move nor open her eyes, until he stood by her side,
exclaiming, "Why, Mercy! my darling, do not look so! There was no danger,"
and he laid the little plant in her hand. She looked at it in silence for
a moment, and then said,--

"Oh, Stephen! to risk your life for such a thing as that! The sight of it
will always make me shudder."

"Then I will throw it away," said Stephen, endeavoring to take it from her
hand; but she held it only the tighter, and whispered,--

"No! oh, what a moment! what a moment! I shall keep this flower as long as
I live!" And she did,--kept it wrapped in a paper, on which were written
the following lines:--

  A MOMENT.

  Lightly as an insect floating
    In the sunny summer air,
  Waved one tiny snow-white blossom,
  From a hidden crevice growing,
    Dainty, fragile-leaved, and fair,
  Where great rocks piled up like mountains,
  Well-nigh to the shining heavens,
    Rose precipitous and bare,
  With a pent-up river rushing,
    Foaming as at boiling heat
    Wildly, madly, at their feet.

  Hardly with a ripple stirring
    The sweet silence by its tone,
  Fell a woman's whisper lightly,--
  "Oh, the dainty, dauntless blossom!
    What deep secret of its own
  Keeps it joyous and light-hearted,
  O'er this dreadful chasm swinging,
    Unsupported and alone,
  With no help or cheer from kindred?
    Oh, the dainty, dauntless thing,
    Bravest creature of the spring!"

  Then the woman saw her lover,
    For one instant saw his face,
  Down the precipice slow sinking,
  Looking up at her, and sending
    Through the shimmering, sunny space
  Look of love and subtle triumph,
  As he plucked the tiny blossom
    In its airy, dizzy place,--
  Plucked it, smiling, as if danger
    Were not danger to the hand
    Of true lover in love's land.

  In her hands her face she buried,
    At her heart the blood grew chill;
  In that one brief moment crowded
  The whole anguish of a lifetime,
    Made her every pulse stand still.
  Like one dead she sat and waited,
  Listening to the stirless silence,
    Ages in a second, till,
  Lightly leaping, came her lover,
    And, still smiling, laid the sweet
    Snow-white blossom at her feet.

  "O my love! my love!" she shuddered,
    "Bloomed that flower by Death's own spell?
  Was thy life so little moment,
  Life and love for that one blossom
    Wert thou ready thus to sell?
  O my precious love! for ever
  I shall keep this faded token
    Of the hour which came to tell,
  In such voice I scarce dared listen,
    How thy life to me had grown
    So much dearer than my own!"

On their way home from the picnic late in the afternoon, they came at the
base of the mountain to a beautiful spot where two little streams met. The
two streams were in sight for a long distance: one shining in a green
meadow; the other leaping and foaming down a gorge in the mountain-side. A
little inn, which was famous for its beer, stood on the meadow space,
bounded by these two streams; and the picnic party halted before its door.
While the white foamy glasses were clinked and tossed, Mercy ran down the
narrow strip of land at the end of which the streams met. A little
thicket of willows grew there. Standing on the very edge of the shore,
Mercy broke off a willow wand, and dipped it to right in the meadow
stream, to the left in the stream from the gorge. Then she brought it back
wet and dripping.

"It has drank of two waters," she cried, holding it up. "Oh, you ought to
see how wonderful it is to watch their coming together at that point! For
a little while you can trace the mountain water by itself in the other:
then it is all lost, and they pour on together." This picture, also, she
set in a frame of verse one day, and gave it to Stephen.

  On a green point of sunny land,
    Hemmed in by mountains stern and high,
  I stood alone as dreamers stand,
    And watched two streams that hurried by.

  One ran to east, and one to south;
    They leaped and sparkled in the sun;
  They foamed like racers at the mouth,
    And laughed as if the race were won.

  Just on the point of sunny land
    A low bush stood, like umpire fair,
  Waving green banners in its hand,
    As if the victory to declare.

  Ah, victory won, but not by race!
    Ah, victory by a sweeter name!
  To blend for ever in embrace,
    Unconscious, swift, the two streams came.

  One instant, separate, side by side
    The shining currents seemed to pour;
  Then swept in one tumultuous tide,
    Swifter and stronger than before.

  O stream to south! O stream to east!
    Which bears the other, who shall see?
  Which one is most, which one is least,
    In this surrendering victory?

  To that green point of sunny land,
    Hemmed in by mountains stern and high,
  I called my love, and, hand in hand,
    We watched the streams that hurried by.




Chapter IX.



It was a turning-point in Mercy's life when she met Parson Dorrance. Here
at last was a man who had strength enough to influence her, culture enough
to teach her, and the firm moral rectitude which her nature so inexorably
demanded. During the first few weeks of their acquaintance, Mercy was
conscious of an insatiable desire to be in his presence: it was an
intellectual and a moral thirst. Nothing could be farther removed from the
absorbing consciousness which passionate love feels of its object, than
was this sentiment she felt toward Parson Dorrance. If he had been a being
from another planet, it could not have been more so. In fact, it was very
much as if another planet had been added to her world,--a planet which
threw brilliant light into every dark corner of this one. She questioned
him eagerly. Her old doubts and perplexities, which Mr. Allen's narrower
mind had been unable to comprehend or to help, were now set at rest and
cleared up by a spiritual vision far keener than her own. Her mind was fed
and trained by an intellect so much stronger than her own that it
compelled her assent and her allegiance. She came to him almost as a
maiden, in the ancient days of Greece, would have gone to the oracle of
the holiest shrine. Parson Dorrance in his turn was as much impressed by
Mercy; but he was never able to see in her simply the pupil, the
questioner. To him she was also a warm and glowing personality, a young
and beautiful woman. Parson Dorrance's hair was white as snow; but his
eyes were as keen and dark as in his youth, his step as firm, and his
pulse as quick. Long before he dreamed of such a thing, he might have
known, if he had taken counsel of his heart, that Mercy was becoming to
him the one woman in the world. There was always this peculiarity in
Mercy's influence upon all who came to love her. She was so unique and
incalculable a person that she made all other women seem by comparison
with her monotonous and wearying. Intimacy with her had a subtle flavor to
it, by which other flavors were dulled. The very impersonality of her
enthusiasms and interests, her capacity for looking on a person for the
time being merely as a representative or mouth-piece, so to speak, of
thoughts, of ideas, of narrations, was one of her strongest charms. By
reason of this, the world was often unjust to her in its comments on her
manner, on her relations with men. The world more than once accused her
uncharitably of flirting. But the men with whom she had friendships knew
better; and now and then a woman had the insight to be just to her, to see
that she was quite capable of regarding a human being as objectively as
she would a flower or a mountain or a star. The blending of this trait in
her with the strong capacity she had for loving individuals was singular;
not more so, perhaps, than the blending of the poetic temperament with the
active, energetic, and practical side of her nature.

It was not long before her name began to be mentioned in connection with
Parson Dorrance's, by the busy tongues which are always in motion in small
villages. It was not long, moreover, before a thought and a hope, in which
both these names were allied, crept into the heart of Lizzy Hunter.

"Oh," she thought, "if only Uncle Dorrance would marry Mercy, how happy I
should be, she would be, every one would be."

No suspicion of the relation in which Mercy stood to Stephen White had
ever crossed Mrs. Hunter's mind. She had never known Stephen until
recently; and his manner towards her had been from the outset so chilled
and constrained by his unconscious jealousy of every new friend Mercy
made, that she had set him down in her own mind as a dull and surly man,
and rarely thought of him. And, as one of poor Mercy's many devices for
keeping up with her conscience a semblance of honesty in the matter of
Stephen was the entire omission of all reference to him in her
conversation, nothing occurred to remind her friends of him. Parson
Dorrance, indeed, had said to her one day,--

"You never speak of Mr. White, Mercy. Is he an agreeable and kind
landlord?"

Mercy started, looked bewilderedly in the Parson's face, and repeated his
words mechanically,--

"Landlord?" Then recollecting herself, she exclaimed, "Oh, yes! we do pay
rent to him; but it was paid for the whole year in advance, and I had
forgotten all about it."

Parson Dorrance had had occasion to distrust Stephen's father, and he
distrusted the son. "Advance? advance?" he exclaimed. "Why did you do
that, child? That was all wrong."

"Oh, no!" said Mercy, eagerly. "I had the money, and it made no difference
to me; and Mr. Allen told me that Mr. White was in a great strait for
money, so I was very glad to give it to him. Such a mother is a terrible
burden on a young man," and Mercy continued talking about Mrs. White,
until she had effectually led the conversation away from Stephen.

When Lizzy Hunter first began to recognize the possibility of her Uncle
Dorrance's loving her dear friend Mercy, she found it very hard to
refrain, in her talks with Mercy, from all allusions to such a
possibility. But she knew instinctively that any such suggestion would
terrify Mercy, and make her withdraw herself altogether. So she contented
herself with talking to her in what she thought were safe generalizations
on the subject of marriage. Lizzy Hunter was one of the clinging,
caressing, caressable women, who nestle into men's affections as kittens
nestle into warm corners, and from very much the same motives,--love of
warmth and shelter, and of being fondled. To all these instincts in Lizzy,
however, were added a really beautiful motherliness and great loyalty of
affection. If the world held more such women, there would be more happy
children and contented husbands.

"Mercy," said she one afternoon, earnestly, "Mercy, it makes me perfectly
wretched to have you say so confidently that you will never be married.
You don't know what you are talking about: you don't realize in the least
what it is for a woman to live alone and homeless to the end of her days."

"I never need be homeless, dear," said Mercy. "I shall always have a home,
even after mother is no longer with me; and I am afraid that is very near,
she has failed so much this past summer. But, even if I were all alone, I
should still keep my home."

"A house isn't a home, Mercy!" exclaimed Lizzy. Of course you can always
be comfortable, so far as a roof and food go towards comfort."

"And that's a great way, my Lizzy," interrupted Mercy, laughing,--"a great
way. No husband could possibly take the place of them, could he?"

"Now, Mercy, don't talk so. You know very well what I mean," replied
Lizzy. "It is so forlorn for a woman not to have anybody need her, not to
have anybody to love her more than he loves all the rest of the world, and
not to have anybody to love herself. Oh, Mercy, I don't see how any woman
lives without it!"

The tears came into Mercy's eyes. There were depths of lovingness in her
soul of which a woman like Lizzy could not even dream. But she spoke in a
resolute tone, and she spoke very honestly, too, when she said,--

"Well, I don't see how any woman can help living very well without it, if
it doesn't come to her. I don't see how any human being--man or woman,
single or married--can help being glad to be alive under any conditions.
It is such a glorious thing to have a soul and a body, and to get the most
out of them. Just from the purely selfish point of view, it seems to me a
delight to live; and when you look at it from a higher point, and think
how much each human being can do for those around him, why, then it is
sublime. Look at Parson Dorrance, Lizzy! Just think of the sum of the
happiness that man has created in this world! He isn't lonely. He couldn't
think of such a thing."

"Yes, he is, too,--I know he is," said Lizzy, impetuously. "The very way
he takes up my children and hugs them and kisses them shows that he longs
for a home and children of his own."

"I think not," replied Mercy. "It is all part of the perpetual overflow of
his benevolence. He can't pass by a living creature, if it is only a dog,
without a desire to give it a moment's happiness. Of happiness for himself
he never thinks, because he is on a plane above happiness,--a plane of
perpetual joy." Mercy hesitated, paused, and then went on, "I don't mean
to be irreverent, but I could never think of his needing personal
ministrations to his own happiness, any more than I could think of God's
needing them. I think he is on a plane as absolutely above such needs as
God is. Not so high above, but as absolutely."

"How are you so sure God is above it?" said Lizzy, timidly. "I can't
conceive of God's being happy if nobody loved him."

Mercy was startled by these words from Lizzy, who rarely questioned and
never philosophized. She opened her lips to reply with a hasty reiteration
of her first sentiment, but the words died even before they were spoken,
arrested by her sudden consciousness of the possibility of a grand truth
underlying Lizzy's instinct. If that were so, did it not lie out far
beyond every fact in life, include and control them all, as the great
truth of gravitation outlies and embraces the physical universe? Did God
so need as well as so love the world, that he gave his only begotten Son
for it? Is this what it meant to be "one with God"? Then, if the great,
illimitable heart of God thus yearns for the love of his creatures, the
greater the heart of a human being, the more must he yearn for a fulness
of love, a completion of the cycle of bonds and joys for which he was
made. From these simple words of a loving woman's heart had flashed a
great light into Mercy's comprehension of God. She was silent for some
moments; then she said solemnly,--

"That was a great thought you had then, Lizzy. I never saw it in that
light before. I shall never forget it. Perhaps you are right about the
Parson, too. I wonder if there is any thing he does long for? If there is,
I would die to give it to him,--I know that."

It was very near Lizzy's lips to say, "If you would live to give it to
him, it would be more to the purpose, perhaps;" but she wisely forbore and
they parted in silence, Mercy absorbed in thinking of this new view of
God's relation to man, and Lizzy hoping that Mercy was thinking of Parson
Dorrance's need of a greater happiness than he possessed.

As Mercy's circle of friends widened, and her interests enlarged and
deepened, her relation to Stephen became at once easier and harder:
easier, because she no longer spent so many hours alone in perplexed
meditation as to the possible wrong in it; harder, because he was
frequently unreasonable, jealous of the pleasure that he saw she found in
others, jealous of the pleasure she gave to others,--jealous, in short, of
every thing in which he was not her centre. Mercy was very patient with
him. She loved him unutterably. She never forgot for an instant the quiet
heroism with which he bore his hard life. As the months had gone on, she
had gradually established a certain kindly familiarity with his mother;
going in often to see her, taking her little gifts of flowers or fruit,
and telling her of all little incidents which might amuse her. She seemed
to herself in this way to be doing a little towards sharing Stephen's
burden; and she also felt a certain bond to the woman who, being Stephen's
mother, ought to have been hers by adoption. The more she saw of Mrs.
White's tyrannical, exacting nature, the more she yearned over Stephen.
Her first feeling of impatience with him, of resentment at the seeming
want of manliness in such subjection, had long ago worn away. She saw that
there were but two courses for him,--either to leave the house, or to buy
a semblance of peace at any cost.

"Flesh and blood can't stand up agin Mis' White," said Marty one day, in
an irrepressible confidence to Mercy. "An' the queerest thing is, that
she'll never let go on you. There ain't nothin' to hender my goin' away
any day, an' there hain't been for twenty year; but she sez I'm to stay
till she dies, an' I don't make no doubt I shall. It's Mister Stephen I
stay for, though, after all, more 'n 't is her. I don't believe the Lord
ever made such a man."

Mercy's cheeks would burn after such a talk as this; and she would lavish
upon Stephen every device of love and cheer which she could invent, to
atone to him by hours, if possible, for the misery of days.

But the hours were few and far between. Stephen's days were filled with
work, and his evenings were his mother's. Only after she slept did he have
freedom. Just as soon as it was safe for him to leave the house, he flew
to Mercy; but, oh, how meagre and pitiful did the few moments seem!

"Hardly long enough to realize that I am with you, my darling," he often
said.

"But then it is every day, Stephen,--think of that," Mercy would reply,
bent always on making all things easier instead of harder for him. Even
the concealment, which was at times well-nigh insupportable to her, she
never complained of now. She had accepted it. "And, after accepting it, I
have no right to reproach him with it: it would be base," she thought.

Nevertheless, it was slowly wearing away the very foundations of her
peace. The morning walks had long been given up. Mercy had been resolute
about this. When she found Stephen insisting upon going in by-ways and
lanes, lest some one should see them who might mention it to his mother,
when he told her that she must not speak of it to her own mother, she said
firmly,--

"This must end, Stephen. How hard it is to me to give it up you know very
well. It is like the sunrise to my day, always, these moments with you.
But I will not multiply concealments. It makes me guilty and ashamed all
the time. Don't urge me to any such thing; for I am not sure that too much
of it would not kill my love for you. Let us be patient. Chance will do a
good deal for us; but I will not plan to meet clandestinely. Whenever you
can come to our house, that is different. It distresses me to have you do
that and never tell of it; but that is yours and not mine, if any thing
can be yours and not mine," she added sadly. Stephen had not heard the
last words.

"Kill your love for me, Mercy!" he exclaimed. "Are you really afraid of
that?"

"No, not kill my love for you," replied Mercy, "I think nothing could do
that, but kill all my joy in my love for you; and that would be as
terrible to you as if the love were killed. You would not know the
difference, and I should not be able to make you see it."

It was a strange thing that with all Stephen's jealousy of Mercy's
enlarged and enlarging life, of her ever-widening circle of friends, he
had no especial jealousy of Parson Dorrance. The Parson was Mercy's only
frequent visitor; and Stephen knew very well that he had become her
teacher and her guide, that she referred every question to his decision,
and was guided implicitly by his taste and wish in her writing and in her
studies. But, when Stephen was a boy in college, Parson Dorranee had
seemed to him an old man; and he now seemed venerable. Stephen could not
have been freer from a lover's jealousy of him, if he had been Mercy's own
father. Perhaps, if his instinct had been truer, it might have quickened
Mercy's. She was equally unaware of the real nature of the Parson's regard
for her. He did for her the same things he did for Lizzy, whom he called
his child. He came to see her no oftener, spoke to her no more
affectionately: she believed that she and Lizzy were sisters together in
his fatherly heart.

When she was undeceived, the shock was very great: it was twofold,--a
shock to her sense of loyalty to Stephen, a shock to her tender love for
Parson Dorrance. It was true, as she had said to Lizzy, that she would
have died to give him a pleasure; and yet she was forced to inflict on him
the hardest of all pains. Every circumstance attending it made it harder;
made it seem to Mercy always in after life, as she looked back upon it,
needlessly hard,--cruelly, malignantly hard.

It was in the early autumn. The bright colors which had thrilled Mercy
with such surprise and pleasure on her first arrival in Penfield were
glowing again on the trees, it seemed to her brighter than before. Purple
asters and golden-rod waved on the roadsides and in the fields; and blue
gentians, for which Penfield was famous, were blooming everywhere. Parson
Dorrance came one day to take Lizzy and Mercy over to his "Parish," as he
called "The Cedars." They had often been with him there; and Mercy had
been for a long time secretly hoping that he would ask her to help him in
teaching the negroes. The day was one of those radiant and crystalline
days peculiar to the New England autumn. On such days, joy becomes
inevitable even to inert and lifeless natures: to enthusiastic and
spontaneous ones, the exhilaration of the air and the sun is as
intoxicating as wine. Mercy was in one of her most mirthful moods. She
frolicked with the negro children, and decked their little woolly heads
with wreaths of golden-rod, till they looked as fantastic as dancing
monkeys. She gathered great sheaves of ferns and blue gentians and asters,
until the Parson implored her to "leave a few just for the poor sun to
shine on." The paths winding among "The Cedars" were in some places
thick-set with white eupatoriums, which were now in full, feathery flower,
some of them so old that, as you brushed past them, a cloud of the fine
thread-like petals flew in all directions. Mercy gathered branch after
branch of these, but threw them away impatiently, as the flowers fell off,
leaving the stems bare.

"Oh, dear!" she exclaimed. "Nature wants some seeds, I suppose; but I want
flowers. What becomes of the poor flower, any way? it lives such a short
while; all its beauty and grace sacrificed to the making of a seed for
next year."

"That's the way with every thing in life, dear child," said Parson
Dorrance. "The thing that shall be is the thing for which all the powers
of nature are at work. We, you and Lizzy and I, will drop off our stems
presently,--I, a good deal the first, for you and Lizzy have the blessing
of youth, but I am old."

"You are not old! You are the youngest person I know," exclaimed Mercy,
impetuously. "You will never be old, Mr. Dorrance, not if you should live
to be as old as--as old as the Wandering Jew!"

Mercy's eyes were fixed intently on the Parson's face; but she did not
note the deep flush which rose to his very hair, as she said these words.
She was thinking only of the glorious soul, and seeing only its shining
through the outer tabernacle. Lizzy Hunter, however, saw the flush, and
knew what it meant, and her heart gave a leap of joy. "Now he can see that
Mercy never thinks of him as an old man, and never would," she thought to
herself; and while her hands were idly playing with her flowers and
mosses, and her face looked as innocent and care-free as a baby's, her
brain was weaving plots of the most complicated devices for hastening on
the future which began to look to her so assured for these two.

They were sitting on a mossy mound in the shadow of great cedar-trees. The
fields around "The Cedars" were filled with low mounds, like velvet
cushions: some of them were merely a mat of moss over great rocks; some of
them were soft yielding masses of moss, low cornel, blueberry-bushes,
wintergreen, blackberry-vines, and sweet ferns; dainty, fragrant, crowded
ovals, lovelier than any florist could ever make; white and green in the
spring, when the cornels were in flower; scarlet and green and blue in the
autumn, when the cornels and the blueberries were in fruit.

Mercy was sitting on a mound which was thick-grown with the shining
wintergreen. She picked a stem which had a cluster of red berries on it,
and below the berries one tiny pink blossom. As she held it up, the
blossom fell, leaving a tiny satin disk behind it on its stem. She took
the bell and tried to fit it again on its place; then she turned it over
and over, held it up to the light and looked through it. "It makes me
sad," she said: "I wish I knew if the flower knows any thing about the
fruit. If it were working to that end all the while, and so were content
to pass on and make room, it would seem all right. But I don't want to
pass on and make room! I do so like to be here!"

Parson Dorrance looked from one woman's face to the other, both young,
both lovely: Lizzy's so full of placid content, unquestioning affection,
and acceptance; Mercy's so full of mysterious earnestness, far-seeing
vision, and interpretation.

"What a lot lies before that gifted creature," he said to himself, "if
life should go wrong with her! If only I might dare to take her fate into
my hands! I do not believe any one else can do for her what I could, if I
were only younger." And the Parson sighed.

That night he stayed in Penfield at Lizzy's house. The next morning, on
his way to Danby, he stopped to see Mercy for a moment. When he entered
her door, he had no knowledge of what lay before him; he had not yet said
to himself, had not yet dared to say to himself, that he would ask Mercy
to be his wife. He knew that the thought of it was more and more present
with him, grew sweeter and sweeter; yet he had never ceased resisting it,
saying that it was impossible. That is, he had never ceased saying so in
words; but his heart had ceased resisting long ago. Only that traitor
which we call judgment had been keeping up a false show of resolute
opinion, just to lure the beguiled heart farther and farther on in a
mistaken security.

But love is like the plants. It has its appointed days for flowers and for
the falling of the flowers. The vague, sweetness of the early hours and
days together, the bright happiness of the first close intimacy and
interchange,--these reach their destined moment, to pass on and make room
for the harvest. Blessed are the lives in which all these sweet early
petals float off gently and in season for the perfect setting of the holy
fruit!

On this morning, when Parson Dorrance entered Mercy's room, it was already
decorated as if for a festival. Every blooming thing she had brought from
"The Cedars" the day before had taken its own place in the room, and
looked as at home as it had looked in the fields. One of Mercy's great
gifts was the gift of creating in rooms a certain look which it is hard to
define. The phrase "vitalized individuality," perhaps, would come as near
describing it as is possible; for it was not merely that the rooms looked
unlike other rooms. Every article in them seemed to stand in the place
where it must needs stand by virtue of its use and its quality. Every
thing had a certain sort of dramatic fitness, without in the least
trenching on the theatrical. Her effects were always produced with simple
things, in simple ways; but they resulted in an impression of abundance
and luxury. As Parson Dorrance glanced around at all the wild-wood beauty,
and the wild-wood fragrance stole upon his senses, a great mastering wave
of love for the woman whose hand had planned it all swept over him. He
recalled Mercy's face the day before, when she had said,--

"You are the youngest person I know;" and, as she crossed the threshold of
the door at that instant, he went swiftly towards her with outstretched
hands, and a look on his face which, if she had seen, she could not have
failed to interpret aright.

But she was used to the outstretched hands; she always put both her own in
them, as simply as a child; and she was bringing to her teacher now a
little poem, of which her thoughts were full. She did not look fully in
his face, therefore; for it was still a hard thing for her to show him her
verses.

Holding out the paper, she said shyly,--

"It had to get itself said or sung, you know,--that thought that haunted
me so yesterday at 'The Cedars.' I daresay it is very bad poetry, though."

Parson Dorrance unfolded the paper, and read the following poem:--

  WHERE?

  My snowy eupatorium has dropped
  Its silver threads of petals in the night;
  No sound told me its blossoming had stopped;
  Its seed-films flutter, silent, ghostly white:
    No answer stirs the shining air,
      As I ask, "Where?"

  Beneath the glossy leaves of wintergreen
  Dead lily-bells lie low, and in their place
  A rounded disk of pearly pink is seen,
  Which tells not of the lily's fragrant grace:
    No answer stirs the shining air,
      As I ask "Where?"

  This morning's sunrise does not show to me
  Seed-film or fruit of my sweet yesterday;
  Like falling flowers, to realms I cannot see
  Its moments floated silently away:
    No answer stirs the shining air,
      As I ask, "Where?"

As he read the last verse, his face altered. Mercy was watching him.

"I thought you wouldn't like the last verse," she said eagerly. "But,
indeed, it doesn't mean doubt. I know very well no day dies; but we can't
see the especial good of each single day by itself. That is all I meant."

Parson Dorrance came closer to Mercy: they were both standing. He laid one
hand on her' head, and said,--

"Child, it was a 'sweet yesterday' wasn't it?"

"Oh, yes," said Mercy, still absorbed in the thought of the poem. "The
day was as sweet as the flowers. But all days are heavenly sweet out of
doors with you and Lizzy," she continued, lifting one hand, and laying it
caressingly on the hand which was stroking her hair.

"O Mercy! Mercy! couldn't I make all days sweet for you? Come to me,
darling, and let me try!" came from Parson Dorrance's lips in hurried and
husky tones.

Mercy looked at him for one second in undisguised terror and bewilderment.
Then she uttered a sharp cry, as of one who had suddenly got a wound, and,
burying her face in her hands, sank into a chair and began to cry
convulsively.

Parson Dorrance walked up and down the room. He dared not speak. He was
not quite sure what Mercy's weeping meant; so hard is it, for a single
moment, to wrench a great hope out of a man's heart. But, as she continued
sobbing, he understood. Unselfish to the core, his first thought was, even
now, "Alas! now she will never let me do any thing more for her. Oh, how
shall I win her back to trust me as a father again?"

"Mercy!" he said. Mercy did not answer nor look up.

"Mercy!" he repeated in a firmer tone. "Mercy, my child, look up at me!"

Docile from her long habit and from her great love, Mercy looked up, with
the tears streaming. As soon as she saw Parson Dorrance's face, she burst
again into more violent crying, and sobbed out incoherently,--

"Oh! I never knew it. It wouldn't be right."

"Hush, dear! Hush!" said the Parson, in a voice of tender authority. "I
have done wrong; and you must forgive me, and forget it. You are not in
the least to blame. It is I who ought to have known that you could never
think of me as any thing but a father."

"Oh! it is not that," sobbed Mercy, vehemently,--"it is not that at all!
But it wouldn't be right."

Parson Dorrance would not have been human if Mercy's vehement "It is not
that,--it is not that!" had not fallen on his ear gratefully, and made
hope stir in his heart again. But her evident grief was too great for the
hope to last a moment.

"You may not know why it seems so wrong to you, dear child," he continued;
"but that is the real reason. There could be no other." He paused. Mercy
shuddered, and opened her lips to speak again; but the words refused to be
uttered. This was the supreme moment of pain. If she could but have
said,--

"I loved some one else long before I saw you. I was not my own. If it had
not been for that, I should have loved you, I know I should!" Even in her
tumult of suffering, she was distinctly conscious of all this. The words
"I could have loved him, I know I could! I can't bear to have him think it
is because he is so old," went clamoring in her heart, pleading to be
said; but she dared not say them.

Tenderly and patiently Parson Dorrance endeavored to soothe her, to
convince her that his words sprung from a hasty impulse which he would be
able wholly to put aside and forget. The one thing that he longed now to
do, the only reparation that he felt was left for him to make to her, was
to enable her, if possible, to look on him as she had done before. But
Mercy herself made this more difficult. Suddenly wiping her tears, she
looked very steadily into his face, and said slowly,--"It is not of the
least use, Mr. Dorrance, for you to say this sort of thing to me. You
can't deceive me. I know exactly how you love me, and how you always will
love me. And, oh, I wish I were dead! It can never be any thing but pain
to you to see me,--never," and she wept more bitterly than before.

"You do not know me, Mercy," replied the Parson, speaking as slowly as she
had done. "All my life has been one long sacrifice of my own chief
preferences. It is not hard for me to do it."

Mercy clasped her hands tighter, and groaned,--

"Oh, I know it! I know it! and I said you were on a plane above all
thought of personal happiness."

The Parson looked bewildered, but went on,--

"You do love me, my child, very dearly, do you not?"

"Oh, you know I do!" cried Mercy. "You know I do!"

"Yes, I know you do, or I should not have said that. You know I am all
alone in the world, do you not?"

"Yes," moaned Mercy.

"Very well. Now remember that you and Lizzy are my two children, and that
the greatest happiness I can have, the greatest help in my loneliness, is
the love of my two daughters. You will not refuse me this help, will you?
You will let me be just as I was before, will you not?"

Mercy did not answer.

"Will you try, Mercy?" he said in a tone almost of the old affectionate
authority; and Mercy again moaned rather than said,--

"Yes."

Then Parson Dorrance kissed her hair where his hand had lain a few moments
before, and said,--

"Now I must go. Good-by, my child."

But Mercy did not look up; and he closed the door gently, leaving her
sitting there bowed and heart-stricken, in the little room so gay with the
bright flowers she had gathered on her "sweet yesterday."




Chapter X.



The winter set in before its time, and with almost unprecedented severity.
Early in the last week in November, the whole country was white with snow,
the streams were frozen solid, and the cold was intense. Week after week
the mercury ranged from zero to ten, fifteen, and even twenty below, and
fierce winds howled night and day. It was a terrible winter for old
people. They dropped on all sides, like leaves swept off of trees in
autumn gales. It was startling to read the death records in the
newspapers, so large a proportion of them were of men and women past
sixty. Mrs. Carr had been steadily growing feebler all summer; but the
change had seemed to Mercy to be more mental than physical, and she had
been in a measure blinded to her mother's real condition. With the
increase of childishness and loss of memory had come an increased
gentleness and love of quiet, which partially disguised the loss of
strength. She would sit in her chair from morning till night, looking out
of the window or watching the movements of those around her, with an
expression of perfect placidity on her face. When she was spoken to, she
smiled, but did not often speak. The smile was meaningless and yet
infinitely pathetic: it was an infant's smile on an aged face; the
infant's heart and infant's brain had come back. All the weariness, all
the perplexity, all the sorrow, had gone from life, had slipped away from
memory. This state had come on so gradually that even Mercy hardly
realized the extent of it. The silent smile or the gentle, simple
ejaculations with which her mother habitually replied meant more to her
than they did to others. She did not comprehend how little they really
proved a full consciousness on her mother's part; and she was unutterably
shocked, when, on going to her bedside one morning, she found her unable
to move, and evidently without clear recognition of any one's face. The
end had begun; the paralysis which had so slowly been putting the mind to
rest had prostrated the body also. It was now only a question of length of
siege, of how much vital force the system had hoarded up. Lying helpless
in bed, the poor old woman was as placid and gentle as before. She never
murmured nor even stirred impatiently. She seemed unconscious of any
weariness. The only emotion she showed was when Mercy left the room; then
she would cry silently till Mercy returned. Her eyes followed Mercy
constantly, as a little babe's follow its mother; and she would not take a
mouthful of food from any other hand.

It was the very hardest form of illness for Mercy to bear. A violent and
distressing disease, taxing her strength, her ingenuity to their utmost
every moment, would have been comparatively nothing to her. To sit day
after day, night after night, gazing into the senseless yet appealing eyes
of this motionless being, who had literally no needs except a helpless
animal's needs of food and drink; who clung to her with the irrational
clinging of an infant, yet would never know even her name again,--it was
worse than the chaining of life to death. As the days wore on, a species
of terror took possession of Mercy. It seemed to her that this silent
watchful, motionless creature never had been her mother,--never had been a
human being like other human beings. As the old face grew more and more
haggard, and the old hands more and more skinny and claw-like, and the
traces of intellect and thought more and more faded away from the
features, the horror deepened, until Mercy feared that her own brain must
be giving way. She revolted from the very thought of herself for having
such a feeling towards her mother. Every instinct of loyalty in her deeply
loyal nature rose up indignantly against her. She would reiterate to
herself the word, "Mother! mother! mother!" as she sat gazing with a
species of horror-stricken fascination into the meaningless face. But she
could not shake off the feeling. Her nerves were fast giving way under the
strain, and no one could help her. If she left the room or the house, the
consciousness that the helpless creature was lying silently weeping for
lack of the sight of her pursued her like a presence. She saw the piteous
old face on the pillow, and the slow tears trickling down the cheeks, just
as distinctly as if she were sitting by the bed. On the whole, the torture
of staying was less than the torture of being away; and for weeks
together she did not leave the house. Sometimes a dull sense of relief
came to her in the thought that by this strange confinement she was
escaping many things which would have been hard. She rarely saw Stephen
except for a few moments late in the evening. He had ventured into Mrs.
Carr's room once or twice; but his presence seemed to disturb her, the
only presence that had done so. She looked distressed, made agonizing
efforts to speak, and with the hand she could lift made a gesture to repel
him when he drew near the bed. In Mercy's overwrought state, this seemed
to her like an omen. She shuddered, and drew Stephen away.

"O Stephen," she said, "she knows now that I have deceived her about you.
Don't come near her again."

"You never deceived her, darling. Do not distress yourself so," whispered
Stephen. They were standing on the threshold of the room. A slight
rustling in the bed made them turn: Mrs. Carr had half-lifted her head
from the pillow, her lower jaw had fallen to its utmost extent in her
effort to articulate, and she was pointing the forefinger of her left hand
at the door. It was a frightful sight. Even Stephen turned pale, and
sprang hastily away.

"You see," said Mercy, in a ghastly whisper, "sometimes she certainly does
know things; but she never looks like that except at you. You must never
come in again."

"No," said Stephen, almost as horror-stricken as Mercy. "It is very
strange though, for she always used to seem so fond of me."

"She was very childish and patient," said Mercy. "And I think she thought
that you were slowly getting to care about me; but now, wherever her soul
is,--I think it has left her body,--she knows that we deceived her."

Stephen made no answer, but turned to go. The expression of resolved
endurance on his face pierced Mercy to the quick, as it always did. She
sprang after him, and clasped both her hands on his arm. "O Stephen,
darling,--precious, brave, strong darling! do forgive me. I ought to be
killed for even saying one word to give you pain. How I can, I don't see,
when I long so to make you happy always."

"You do give me great, unutterable happiness, Mercy," he replied. "I never
think of the pain: I only think of the joy," and he laid her hand on his
lips. "All the pain that you could possibly give me in a lifetime could
not outweigh the joy of one such moment as this, when you say that you
love me."

These days were unspeakably hard for Stephen. He had grown during the past
year to so live on the sight and in the blessedness of Mercy that to be
shut away from them was simply a sort of dying. There was no going back
for him to the calm routine of the old life before she came. He was
restless and wretched: he walked up and down in front of the house every
night, watching the shadow of her figure on the curtains of her mother's
room. He made all manner of excuses, true and false, reasonable and
unreasonable, to speak to her for a moment at the door in the morning. He
carried the few verses in his pocket-book she had given him; and, although
he knew them nearly by heart, he spent long hours in his office turning
the little papers over and over. Some of them were so joyous that they
stirred in him almost a bitter incredulity as he read them in these days
of loss and pain. One was a sonnet which she had written during a two
days' absence of his,--his only absence from his mother's house for six
years. Mercy had been astonished at her sense of loneliness in these two
days. "O Stephen," she had said, when he came back, "I am honestly ashamed
of having missed you so much. Just the knowing that you wouldn't be here
to come in, in the evenings, made the days seem a thousand years long, and
this is what came of it."

And she gave him this sonnet:--

  TO AN ABSENT LOVER.

  That so much change should come when them dost go,
  Is mystery that I cannot ravel quite.
  The very house seems dark as when the light
  Of lamps goes out. Each wonted thing doth grow
  So altered, that I wander to and fro,
  Bewildered by the most familiar sight,
  And feel like one who rouses in the night
  From dream of ecstasy, and cannot know
  At first if he be sleeping or awake,
  My foolish heart so foolish for thy sake
  Hath grown, dear one!
      Teach me to be more wise.
  I blush for all my foolishness doth lack;
  I fear to seem a coward in thine eyes.
  Teach me, dear one,--but first thou must come back!

Another was a little poem, which she laughingly called his and not hers.
One morning, when they had bade each other "good-by," and she had kissed
him,--a rare thing for Mercy to do, he had exclaimed, "That kiss will go
floating before me all day in the air, Mercy. I shall see every thing in a
light as rosy as your lips."

At night she gave him this little poem, saying,--

"This is your poem, not mine, darling. I should never have thought of any
thing so absurd myself."

  "COULEUR DE ROSE."

  All things to-day "Couleur de rose,"
    I see,--oh, why?
  I know, and my dear love she knows,
    Why, oh, why!
  On both my eyes her lips she set,
  All red and warm and dewy wet,
    As she passed by.
  The kiss did not my eyelids close,
  But like a rosy vapor goes,
    Where'er I sit, where'er I lie,
  Before my every glance, and shows
    All things to-day "Couleur de rose."

  Would it last thus? Alas, who knows?
    Men ask and sigh:
  They say it fades, "Couleur de rose."
    Why, oh, why?
  Without swift joy and sweet surprise,
  Surely those lips upon my eyes
    Could never lie,
  Though both our heads were white as snows,
  And though the bitterest storm that blows,
    Of trouble and adversity,
  Had bent us low: all life still shows
    To eyes that love "Couleur de rose."

This sonnet, also, she persisted in calling Stephen's, and not her own,
because he had asked her the question which had suggested it:--

  LOVERS' THOUGHTS.

  "How feels the earth when, breaking from the night,
  The sweet and sudden Dawn impatient spills
  Her rosy colors all along the hills?
  How feels the sea, as it turns sudden white,
  And shines like molten silver in the light
  Which pours from eastward when the full moon fills
  Her time to rise?"

                  "I know not, love, what thrills
  The earth, the sea, may feel. How should I know?
  Except I guess by this,--the joy I feel
  When sudden on my silence or my gloom
  Thy presence bursts and lights the very room?
  Then on my face doth not glad color steal
  Like shining waves, or hill-tops' sunrise glow?"

One of the others was the poem of which I spoke once before, the poem
which had been suggested to her by her desolate sense of homelessness on
the first night of her arrival in Penfield. This poem had been widely
copied after its first appearance in one of the magazines; and it had been
more than once said of it, "Surely no one but a genuine outcast could have
written such a poem as this." It was hard for Mercy's friends to
associate the words with her. When she was asked how it happened that she
wrote them, she exclaimed, "I did not write that poem, I lived it one
night,--the night when I came to Penfield, and drove through these streets
in the rain with mother. No vagabond in the world ever felt more forlorn
than I did then."

  THE OUTCAST.

  O sharp, cold wind, thou art my friend!
  And thou, fierce rain, I need not dread
  Thy wonted touch upon my head!
  On, loving brothers! Wreak and spend
  Your force on all these dwellings. Rend
  These doors so pitilessly locked,
  To keep the friendless out! Strike dead
  The fires whose glow hath only mocked
  By muffled rays the night where I,
  The lonely outcast, freezing lie!

  Ha! If upon those doors to-night
  I knocked, how well I know the stare,
  The questioning, the mingled air
  Of scorn and pity at the sight,
  The wonder if it would be right
  To give me alms of meat and bread!
  And if I, reckless, standing there,
  For once the truth imploring said,
  That not for bread or meat I longed,
  That such an alms my real need wronged,

  That I would fain come in, and sit
  Beside their fire, and hear the voice
  Of children; yea, and if my choice
  Were free, and I dared mention it,
  And some sweet child should think me fit
  To hold a child upon my knee
  One moment, would my soul rejoice,
  More than to banquet royally,
  And I the pulses of its wrist
  Would kiss, as men the cross have kissed.

  Ha! Well the haughty stare I know
  With which they'd say, "The man is mad!"
  "What an impostor's face he had!"
  "How insolent these beggars grow!"
  Go to, ye happy people! Go!
  My yearning is as fierce as hate.
  Must my heart break, that yours be glad?
  Will your turn come at last, though late?
  I will not knock, I will pass by;
  My comrades wait,--the wind, the rain.
  Comrades, we'll run a race to-night!
  The stakes may not seem much to gain:
  The goal is not marked plain in sight;
  But, comrades, understand,--if I
  Drop dead, 't will be a victory!

These poems and many others Stephen carried with him wherever he went. To
read them over was next to seeing Mercy. The poet was hardly less dear to
him than the woman. He felt at times so removed from her by the great gulf
which her genius all unconsciously seemed to create between herself and
him that he doubted his own memories of her love, and needed to be
reassured by gazing into her eyes, touching her hand, and listening to her
voice. It seemed to him that, if this separation lasted much longer, he
should lose all faith in the fact of their relation. Very impatient
thoughts of poor old Mrs. Carr filled Stephen's thoughts in these days.
Heretofore she had been no barrier to his happiness; her still and
childlike presence was no restraint upon him; he had come to disregard it
as he would the presence of an infant in a cradle. Therefore, he had, or
thought he had, the kindest of feelings towards her; but now that her
helpless paralyzed hands had the power to shut him away from Mercy, he
hated her, as he had always hated every thing which stood between him and
delight. Yet, had it been his duty to minister to her, he would have done
it as gently, as faithfully, as Mercy herself. He would have spoken to her
in the mildest and tenderest of tones, while in his heart he wished her
dead. So far can a fine fastidiousness, allied to a sentiment of
compassion, go towards making a man a consummate hypocrite.

Parson Dorrance came often to see Mercy, but always with Lizzy Hunter. By
the subtle instinct of love, he knew that to see him thus, and see him
often, would soonest win back for him his old place in Mercy's life. The
one great desire he had left now was to regain that,--to see her again
look up in his face with the frank, free, loving look which she always had
had until that sad morning.

A strange incident happened to Mercy in these first weeks of her mother's
illness. She was called to the door one morning by the message that a
stranger wished to speak to her. She found standing there an elderly
woman, with a sweet but care-worn face, who said eagerly, as soon as she
appeared,--

"Are you Mrs. Philbrick?"

"Yes," said Mercy. "Did you wish to see me?"

The woman hesitated a moment, as if trying to phrase her sentence, and
then burst out impetuously, with a flood of tears,--

"Won't you come and help me make my husband come home. He is so sick, and
I believe he will die in that wretched old garret."

Mercy looked at her in blank astonishment, and her first thought was that
she must be insane; but the woman continued,--

"I'm Mrs. Wheeler. You never saw me before, but my husband's talked about
you ever since he first saw you on the street, that day. You're the only
human being I've ever known him take a fancy to; and I do believe, if
anybody could do any thing with him, you could."

It seemed that, in addition to all his other eccentricities, "Old Man
Wheeler" had the habit of disappearing from his home at intervals, leaving
no clew behind him. He had attacks of a morbid unwillingness to see a
human face: during tkese attacks, he would hide himself, sometimes in one
place, sometimes in another. He had old warehouses, old deserted mills and
factories, and uninhabited rooms and houses in all the towns in the
vicinity. There was hardly any article of merchandise which he had not at
one time or another had a depot for, or a manufactory of. He had
especially a hobby for attempting to make articles which were not made in
this country. It was only necessary for some one to go to him, and say,
"Mr. Wheeler, do you know how much this country pays every year for
importing such or such an article?" to throw him into a rage.

"Damned nonsense! Damned nonsense, sir. Just as well make it here. I'll
make it myself." And up would start a new manufacture, just as soon as he
could get men to work at it.

At one time it was ink, at another time brushes, then chintz, and then
pocket-books; in fact, nobody pretended to remember all the schemes which
the old man had failed in. He would stop them as instantaneously as he
began them, dismiss the workmen, shut up the shops or the mills, turn the
key on them just as they stood, very possibly filled full of material in
the rough. He did not care. The hobby was over: he had proved that the
thing could be made in America, and he was content. It was usually in some
one of these disused buildings that he set up his hermitage in these
absences from home. He would sally out once a day and buy bread, just a
pittance, hardly enough to keep him alive, and then bury himself again in
darkness and solitude. If the absence did not last more than three or four
days, his wife and sons gave themselves no concern about him. He usually
returned a saner and healthier man than he went away. When the absences
were longer, they went in search of him, and could usually prevail on him
to return home with them. But this last absence had been much longer than
usual before they found him. He was as cunning and artful as a fugitive
from justice in concealing his haunt. At last he was discovered in the old
garret store-room over the Brick Row. The marvel was that he had not died
of cold there. He was not far from it, however; for he was so ill that at
times he was delirious. He lay curled up in the old stack of comforters in
the corner, with only a jug of water and some crumbs of bread by his side,
when they found him. He had been so ill when he last crawled up the stairs
that he had forgotten to take the key out of the keyhole, but left it on
the outside, and by that they found him. At the bare suggestion of his
going home, he became so furious that it seemed unsafe to urge it. His
wife and eldest son had stayed there with him now for two days; but he had
grown steadily worse, and it was plain that he must die unless he could be
properly cared for.

"At last I thought of you," said the poor woman. "He's always said so much
about you; and once, when I was riding with him, he pointed you out to me
on the street, and said he, 'That's the very nicest girl in America.' And
he told me about his giving you the clock; and I never knew him give any
thing away before in his whole life. Not but what he has always been very
good to me, in his way. He'd never give me a cent o' money; but he'd
always pay bills,--that is, that was any way reasonable. But I said to
'Siah this morning, 'If there's anybody on earth can coax your father to
let us take him home, it's that Mrs. Philbrick; and I'm going to find
her.' 'Siah didn't want me to. The boys are so ashamed about it; but I
don't see any shame in it. It's just a kind of queer way Mr. Wheeler's
always had; and everybody's got something queer about 'em, first or last;
and this way of Mr. Wheeler's of going off don't hurt anybody but himself.
I got used to 't long ago. Now, won't you come, and try and see if you
can't persuade him? It won't do any harm to try."

"Why, yes, indeed, Mrs. Wheeler, I'll come; but I don't believe I can do
any thing," said Mercy, much touched by the appeal to her. "I have
wondered very much what had become of Mr. Wheeler. I had not seen him for
a long time."

When they went into the garret, the old man was half-lying, half-sitting,
propped on his left elbow. In his right hand he held his cane, with which
he continually tapped the floor, as he poured out a volley of angry
reproaches to his son "'Siah," a young man of eighteen or twenty years
old, who sat on a roll of leather at a safe distance from his father's
lair. As the door opened, and he saw Mercy entering with his wife, the old
man's face underwent the most extraordinary change. Surprise, shame,
perplexity, bravado,--all struggled together there.

"God bless my soul! God bless my soul!" he exclaimed, trying to draw the
comforters more closely about him.

Mercy went up to him, and, sitting down by his side, began to talk to him
in a perfectly natural tone, as if she were making an ordinary call on an
invalid in his own home. She said nothing to suggest that he had done any
thing unnatural in hiding himself, and spoke of his severe cold as being
merely what every one else had been suffering from for some time. Then she
told him how ill her mother was, and succeeded in really arousing his
interest in that. Finally, she said,--

"But I must go now. I can't be away from my mother long. I will come and
see you again to-morrow. Shall I find you here or at your home?"

"Well, I was thinking I 'd better move home to-day," said he.

His wife and son involuntarily exchanged glances. This was more than they
had dared to hope.

"Yes, I would, if I were you," replied Mercy, still in a perfectly natural
tone. "It would be so much better for you to be in a room with a fire in
it for a few days. There isn't any way of warming this room, is there?"
said she, looking all about, as if to see if it might not be possible
still to put up a stove there. "'Siah" turned his head away to hide a
smile, so amused was he by the tact of the remark. "No, I see there is no
stovepipe-hole here," she went on, "so you'd much better move home. I'm
going by the stable. Let me send Seth right up with the carriage, won't
you?"

"No, no! Bless my soul! Thinks I'm made of money, don't she! No, no! I can
walk." And the old half-crazy glare came into his eyes.

Mercy went nearer to him, and laid her hand gently on his.

"Mr. Wheeler," said she, "you did something very kind for me once: now
won't you do something once more,--just once? I want you to go home in the
carriage. It is a terribly cold day, and the streets are very icy. I
nearly fell several times myself coming over here. You will certainly
take a terrible cold, if you walk this morning. Please say I may get the
carriage."

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul, child! Go get it then, if you care so much;
but tell him I'll only pay a quarter,--only a quarter, remember. They'd
take every cent I've got. They are all wolves, wolves, wolves!"

"Yes, I'll tell him only a quarter. I'll have him here in a few minutes!"
exclaimed Mercy, and ran out of the room hastily before the old man could
change his mind.

As good luck would have it, Seth and his "kerridge" were in sight when
Mercy reached the foot of the staircase. So in less than five minutes she
returned to the garret, exclaiming,--

"Here is Seth now, Mr. Wheeler. It is so fortunate I met him. Now I can
see you off." The old man was so weak that his son had to carry him down
the stairs; and his face, seen in the broad daylight, was ghastly. As they
placed him in the carriage, he called out to his wife and son, sharply,--

"Don't you get in! You can walk, you can walk. Mind, he's to have but a
quarter, tell him." And, as Seth whipped up his horses and drove off, the
words, "wolves, wolves, wolves," were heard coming in muffled tones
through the door.

"He'd never have gone, if you hadn't come back,--never," said Mrs.
Wheeler, as she turned to Mercy. "I never can thank you enough. It'll save
his life, getting him out of that garret."

Mercy did not say, but she thought that it was too late. A mortal
sickness had fastened upon the old man; and so it proved. When she went to
his home the next day, he was in a high fever and delirious; and he lived
only a few days. He had intervals of partial consciousness, and in those
he seemed to be much touched by the patient care which his two sons were
giving to him. He had always been a hard father; had compelled his sons
very early to earn their own living, and had refused to give them money,
which he could so easily have spared, to establish themselves in business.
Now, that it was too late, he repented.

"Good boys, good boys, good boys after all," he would mutter to himself,
as they bent over him, and nursed him tenderly in his helplessness. "Might
have left them more money, might have left them more. Mistake, mistake!"
Once he roused, and with great vehemence asked to have his lawyer sent for
immediately. But, when the lawyer came, the delirium had returned again:
it was too late; and the old man died without repairing the injustice he
had done. The last intelligible words he spoke were, "Mistake! mistake!"

And he had indeed made a mistake. When his will was opened, it was found
that the whole bulk of his large estate had been left to trustees, to be
held as a fund for assisting poor young men to a certain amount of capital
to go into business with,--the very thing which he had never done for his
own children. The trust was burdened with such preposterous conditions,
however, that it never could have amounted to any thing, even if the
courts had not come to the rescue, and mercifully broken the will,
dividing the property where it rightfully belonged, between the wife and
children.

Early in February Mrs. Carr died. It was more like a going to sleep than
like a death. She lay for two days in a dozing state, smiling whenever
Mercy spoke to her, and making great efforts to swallow food whenever
Mercy offered it to her. At last she closed her eyes, turned her head on
one side, as if for a sounder sleep, and never moved again.

However we may think we are longing for the release from suffering to come
to one we love, when it does come, it is a blow, is a shock. Hundreds of
times Mercy had said to herself in the course of the winter, "Oh, if God
would only take my mother to heaven! Her death would be easier to bear
than this." But now she would have called her back, if she could. The
silent house, the empty room, still more terrible the long empty hours in
which nobody needed her help, all wrung Mercy's heart. It was her first
experience of being alone. She had often pictured to herself, or rather
she thought she had, what it would be; but no human imagination can ever
sound the depths of that word: only the heart can feel it. It is a marvel
that hearts do not break under it oftener than they do. The silence which
is like that darkness which could be felt; the sudden awakening in the
night with a wonder what it means that the loved one is not there; the
pitiless morning light which fills the empty house, room after room; and
harder than all else to forget, to rise above--the perpetual sense of no
future: even the little near futures of the next hour, the next day, all
cut off, all closed, to the human being left utterly alone. The mockery of
the instincts of hunger and need of rest seems cruel. What a useless
routine, for one left alone, to be fed, to sleep, and to rise up to eat
and sleep again!

Mercy bore all this in a sort of dumb bewilderment for a few days. All
Stephen's love and sympathy did not help her. He was unutterably tender
and sympathizing now that poor old Mrs. Carr was fairly out of his way. It
surprised even himself to see what a sort of respectful affection he felt
for her in her grave. Any misgiving that this new quiet and undisturbed
possession of Mercy might not continue did not cross his mind; and when
Mercy said to him suddenly, one evening about ten days after her mother's
death, "Stephen, I must go away, I can't live in this house another week,