Iop i¼nd spade.
Stinting wife, and bairns, and kye, to fat some courtier lord,--
Let them die o' rent wha like, mither, and I'll die by sword.

Nor I wadna be a clerk, mither, to bide aye ben,
Scrabbling ower the sheets o' parchment with a weary weary pen;
Looking through the lang stane windows at a narrow strip o' sky,
Like a laverock in a withy cage, until I pine away and die.

Nor I wadna be a merchant, mither, in his lang furred gown,
Trailing strings o' footsore horses through the noisy dusty town;
Louting low to knights and ladies, fumbling o'er his wares,
Telling lies, and scraping siller, heaping cares on cares.

Nor I wadna be a soldier, mither, to dice wi' ruffian bands,
Pining weary months in castles, looking over wasted lands.
Smoking byres, and shrieking women, and the grewsome sights o' war--
There's blood on my hand eneugh, mither; it's ill to make it mair.

If I had married a wife, mither, I might ha' been douce and still,
And sat at hame by the ingle side to crack and laugh my fill;
Sat at hame wi' the woman I looed, and wi' bairnies at my knee:
But death is bauld, and age is cauld, and luve's no for me.

For when first I stirred in your side, mither, ye ken full well
How you lay all night up among the deer out on the open fell;
And so it was that I won the heart to wander far and near,
Caring neither for land nor lassie, but the bonnie dun deer.

Yet I am not a losel and idle, mither, nor a thief that steals;
I do but hunt God's cattle, upon God's ain hills;
For no man buys and sells the deer, and the bonnie fells are free
To a belted knight with hawk on hand, and a gangrel loon like me.

So I'm aff and away to the muirs, mither, to hunt the deer,
Ranging far frae frowning faces, and the douce folk here;
Crawling up through burn and bracken, louping down the screes,
Looking out frae craig and headland, drinking up the simmer breeze.

Oh, the wafts o' heather honey, and the music o' the brae,
As I watch the great harts feeding, nearer, nearer a' the day.
Oh, to hark the eagle screaming, sweeping, ringing round the sky--
That's a bonnier life than stumbling ower the muck to colt and kye.

And when I'm taen and hangit, mither, a brittling o' my deer,
Ye'll no leave your bairn to the corbie craws, to dangle in the air;
But ye'll send up my twa douce brethren, and ye'll steal me frae the tree,
And bury me up on the brown brown muirs, where I aye looed to be.

Ye'll bury me 'twixt the brae and the burn, in a glen far away,
Where I may hear the heathcock craw, and the great harts bray;
And gin my ghaist can walk, mither, I'll go glowering at the sky,
The livelong night on the black hill sides where the dun deer lie.

In the New Forest, 1847.



SING HEIGH-HO!



There sits a bird on every tree;
         Sing heigh-ho!
There sits a bird on every tree,
And courts his love as I do thee;
      Sing heigh-ho, and heigh-ho!
   Young maids must marry.

There grows a flower on every bough;
         Sing heigh-ho!
There grows a flower on every bough,
Its petals kiss--I'll show you how:
      Sing heigh-ho, and heigh-ho!
   Young maids must marry.

From sea to stream the salmon roam;
         Sing heigh-ho!
From sea to stream the salmon roam;
Each finds a mate, and leads her home;
      Sing heigh-ho, and heigh-ho!
   Young maids must marry.

The sun's a bridegroom, earth a bride;
         Sing heigh-ho!
They court from morn till eventide:
The earth shall pass, but love abide.
      Sing heigh-ho, and heigh-ho!
   Young maids must marry.

Eversley, 1847.



A MARCH



   Dreary East winds howling o'er us;
   Clay-lands knee-deep spread before us;
   Mire and ice and snow and sleet;
   Aching backs and frozen feet;
   Knees which reel as marches quicken,
   Ranks which thin as corpses thicken;
   While with carrion birds we eat,
   Calling puddle-water sweet,
As we pledge the health of our general, who fares as rough as we:
What can daunt us, what can turn us, led to death by such as he?

Eversley, 1848.



A LAMENT



The merry merry lark was up and singing,
   And the hare was out and feeding on the lea;
And the merry merry bells below were ringing,
   When my child's laugh rang through me.

Now the hare is snared and dead beside the snow-yard,
   And the lark beside the dreary winter sea;
And the baby in his cradle in the churchyard
   Sleeps sound till the bell brings me.

Eversley, 1848.



THE NIGHT BIRD:  A MYTH



A floating, a floating
Across the sleeping sea,
All night I heard a singing bird
Upon the topmost tree.

'Oh came you off the isles of Greece,
Or off the banks of Seine;
Or off some tree in forests free,
Which fringe the western main?'

'I came not off the old world
Nor yet from off the new--
But I am one of the birds of God
Which sing the whole night through.'

'Oh sing, and wake the dawning--
Oh whistle for the wind;
The night is long, the current strong,
My boat it lags behind.'

'The current sweeps the old world,
The current sweeps the new;
The wind will blow, the dawn will glow
Ere thou hast sailed them through.'

Eversley, 1848.



THE DEAD CHURCH



Wild wild wind, wilt thou never cease thy sighing?
   Dark dark night, wilt thou never wear away?
Cold cold church, in thy death sleep lying,
   The Lent is past, thy Passion here, but not thine Easter-day.

Peace, faint heart, though the night be dark and sighing;
   Rest, fair corpse, where thy Lord himself hath lain.
Weep, dear Lord, above thy bride low lying;
   Thy tears shall wake her frozen limbs to life and health again.

Eversley, 1848.



A PARABLE FROM LIEBIG



The church bells were ringing, the devil sat singing
   On the stump of a rotting old tree;
'Oh faith it grows cold, and the creeds they grow old,
   And the world is nigh ready for me.'

The bells went on ringing, a spirit came singing,
   And smiled as he crumbled the tree;
'Yon wood does but perish new seedlings to cherish,
   And the world is too live yet for thee.'

Eversley, 1848.



THE STARLINGS



Early in spring time, on raw and windy mornings,
Beneath the freezing house-eaves I heard the starlings sing--
'Ah dreary March month, is this then a time for building wearily?
   Sad, sad, to think that the year is but begun.'

Late in the autumn, on still and cloudless evenings,
Among the golden reed-beds I heard the starlings sing--
'Ah that sweet March month, when we and our mates were courting merrily;
   Sad, sad, to think that the year is all but done.'

Eversley, 1848.



OLD AND NEW:  A PARABLE



See how the autumn leaves float by decaying,
Down the wild swirls of the rain-swollen stream.
So fleet the works of men, back to their earth again;
Ancient and holy things fade like a dream.

Nay! see the spring-blossoms steal forth a-maying,
Clothing with tender hues orchard and glen;
So, though old forms pass by, ne'er shall their spirit die,
Look!  England's bare boughs show green leaf again.

Eversley, 1848.



THE WATCHMAN



'Watchman, what of the night?'
   'The stars are out in the sky;
And the merry round moon will be rising soon,
   For us to go sailing by.'

'Watchman, what of the night?'
   'The tide flows in from the sea;
There's water to float a little cockboat
   Will carry such fishers as we.'

'Watchman, what of the night?'
   'The night is a fruitful time;
When to many a pair are born children fair,
   To be christened at morning chime.'

1849.



THE WORLD'S AGE



Who will say the world is dying?
   Who will say our prime is past?
Sparks from Heaven, within us lying,
   Flash, and will flash till the last.
Fools! who fancy Christ mistaken;
   Man a tool to buy and sell;
Earth a failure, God-forsaken,
   Anteroom of Hell.

Still the race of Hero-spirits
   Pass the lamp from hand to hand;
Age from age the Words inherits--
   'Wife, and Child, and Fatherland.'
Still the youthful hunter gathers
   Fiery joy from wold and wood;
He will dare as dared his fathers
   Give him cause as good.

While a slave bewails his fetters;
   While an orphan pleads in vain;
While an infant lisps his letters,
   Heir of all the age's gain;
While a lip grows ripe for kissing;
   While a moan from man is wrung;
Know, by every want and blessing,
   That the world is young.

1849.



THE SANDS OF DEE



'O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
      And call the cattle home,
      And call the cattle home
   Across the sands of Dee;'
The western wind was wild and dank with foam,
   And all alone went she.

The western tide crept up along the sand,
      And o'er and o'er the sand,
      And round and round the sand,
   As far as eye could see.
The rolling mist came down and hid the land:
   And never home came she.

'Oh! is it weed, or fish, or floating hair--
      A tress of golden hair,
      A drowned maiden's hair
   Above the nets at sea?
Was never salmon yet that shone so fair
   Among the stakes on Dee.'

They rowed her in across the rolling foam,
      The cruel crawling foam,
      The cruel hungry foam,
   To her grave beside the sea:
But still the boatmen hear her call the cattle home
   Across the sands of Dee.

Eversley, 1849.



THE TIDE ROCK



How sleeps yon rock, whose half-day's bath is done.
With broad blight side beneath the broad bright sun,
Like sea-nymph tired, on cushioned mosses sleeping.
Yet, nearer drawn, beneath her purple tresses
From drooping brows we find her slowly weeping.
   So many a wife for cruel man's caresses
   Must inly pine and pine, yet outward bear
   A gallant front to this world's gaudy glare.

Ilfracombe, 1849.



ELEGIACS



Wearily stretches the sand to the surge, and the surge to the cloudland;
Wearily onward I ride, watching the water alone.
Not as of old, like Homeric Achilles, ??de? ya???,
Joyous knight-errant of God, thirsting for labour and strife;
No more on magical steed borne free through the regions of ether,
But, like the hack which I ride, selling my sinew for gold.
Fruit-bearing autumn is gone; let the sad quiet winter hang o'er me--
What were the spring to a soul laden with sorrow and shame?
Blossoms would fret me with beauty; my heart has no time to bepraise them;
Gray rock, bough, surge, cloud, waken no yearning within.
Sing not, thou sky-lark above! even angels pass hushed by the weeper.
Scream on, ye sea-fowl! my heart echoes your desolate cry.
Sweep the dry sand on, thou wild wind, to drift o'er the shell and the sea-
weed;
Sea-weed and shell, like my dreams, swept down the pitiless tide.
Just is the wave which uptore us; 'tis Nature's own law which condemns us;
Woe to the weak who, in pride, build on the faith of the sand!
Joy to the oak of the mountain:  he trusts to the might of the rock-clefts;
Deeply he mines, and in peace feeds on the wealth of the stone.

Morte Sands, Devonshire,
February 1849.



DARTSIDE



I cannot tell what you say, green leaves,
   I cannot tell what you say:
But I know that there is a spirit in you,
   And a word in you this day.

I cannot tell what you say, rosy rocks,
   I cannot tell what you say:
But I know that there is a spirit in you,
   And a word in you this day.

I cannot tell what you say, brown streams,
   I cannot tell what you say:
But I know that in you too a spirit doth live,
   And a word doth speak this day.

'Oh green is the colour of faith and truth,
And rose the colour of love and youth,
   And brown of the fruitful clay.
   Sweet Earth is faithful, and fruitful, and young,
   And her bridal day shall come ere long,
And you shall know what the rocks and the streams
      And the whispering woodlands say.'

Drew's Teignton, Dartmoor,
July 31, 1849.



MY HUNTING SONG



      Forward!  Hark forward's the cry!
One more fence and we're out on the open,
So to us at once, if you want to live near us!
Hark to them, ride to them, beauties! as on they go,
Leaping and sweeping away in the vale below!
Cowards and bunglers, whose heart or whose eye is slow,
   Find themselves staring alone.

      So the great cause flashes by;
Nearer and clearer its purposes open,
While louder and prouder the world-echoes cheer us:
Gentlemen sportsmen, you ought to live up to us,
Lead us, and lift us, and hallo our game to us--
We cannot call the hounds off, and no shame to us--
   Don't be left staring alone!

Eversley, 1849.



ALTON LOCKE'S SONG



Weep, weep, weep and weep,
   For pauper, dolt, and slave!
Hark! from wasted moor and fen,
Feverous alley, stifling den,
Swells the wail of Saxon men--
   Work! or the grave!

Down, down, down and down,
   With idler, knave, and tyrant!
Why for sluggards cark and moil?
He that will not live by toil
Has no right on English soil!
   God's word's our warrant!

Up, up, up and up!
   Face your game and play it!
The night is past, behold the sun!
The idols fall, the lie is done!
The Judge is set, the doom begun!
   Who shall stay it?

On Torridge, May 1849.



THE DAY OF THE LORD



The Day of the Lord is at hand, at hand:
   Its storms roll up the sky:
The nations sleep starving on heaps of gold;
   All dreamers toss and sigh;
The night is darkest before the morn;
When the pain is sorest the child is born,
      And the Day of the Lord at hand.

Gather you, gather you, angels of God--
   Freedom, and Mercy, and Truth;
Come! for the Earth is grown coward and old,
   Come down, and renew us her youth.
Wisdom, Self-Sacrifice, Daring, and Love,
Haste to the battle-field, stoop from above,
      To the Day of the Lord at hand.

Gather you, gather you, hounds of hell--
   Famine, and Plague, and War;
Idleness, Bigotry, Cant, and Misrule,
   Gather, and fall in the snare!
Hireling and Mammonite, Bigot and Knave,
Crawl to the battle-field, sneak to your grave,
      In the Day of the Lord at hand.

Who would sit down and sigh for a lost age of gold,
   While the Lord of all ages is here?
True hearts will leap up at the trumpet of God,
   And those who can suffer, can dare.
Each old age of gold was an iron age too,
And the meekest of saints may find stern work to do,
      In the Day of the Lord at hand.

On the Torridge, Devonshire,
September 10, 1849.



A CHRISTMAS CAROL



It chanced upon the merry merry Christmas eve,
   I went sighing past the church across the moorland dreary--
'Oh! never sin and want and woe this earth will leave,
   And the bells but mock the wailing round, they sing so cheery.
How long, O Lord! how long before Thou come again?
   Still in cellar, and in garret, and on moorland dreary
The orphans moan, and widows weep, and poor men toil in vain,
   Till earth is sick of hope deferred, though Christmas bells be cheery.'

Then arose a joyous clamour from the wild-fowl on the mere,
   Beneath the stars, across the snow, like clear bells ringing,
And a voice within cried--'Listen!--Christmas carols even here!
   Though thou be dumb, yet o'er their work the stars and snows are singing.
Blind!  I live, I love, I reign; and all the nations through
   With the thunder of my judgments even now are ringing.
Do thou fulfil thy work but as yon wild-fowl do,
   Thou wilt heed no less the wailing, yet hear through it angels singing.'

Eversley, 1849.



THE OUBIT {260}



It was an hairy oubit, sae proud he crept alang,
A feckless hairy oubit, and merrily he sang--
'My Minnie bad me bide at hame until I won my wings;
I show her soon my soul's aboon the warks o' creeping things.'

This feckless hairy oubit cam' hirpling by the linn,
A swirl o' wind cam' doun the glen, and blew that oubit in:
Oh when he took the water, the saumon fry they rose,
And tigg'd him a' to pieces sma', by head and tail and toes.

Tak' warning then, young poets a', by this poor oubit's shame;
Though Pegasus may nicher loud, keep Pegasus at hame.
Oh haud your hands frae inkhorns, though a' the Muses woo;
For critics lie, like saumon fry, to mak' their meals o' you.

Eversley, 1851.



THE THREE FISHERS



Three fishers went sailing away to the West,
   Away to the West as the sun went down;
Each thought on the woman who loved him the best,
   And the children stood watching them out of the town;
   For men must work, and women must weep,
   And there's little to earn, and many to keep,
      Though the harbour bar be moaning.

Three wives sat up in the lighthouse tower,
   And they trimmed the lamps as the sun went down;
They looked at the squall, and they looked at the shower,
   And the night-rack came rolling up ragged and brown.
   But men must work, and women must weep,
   Though storms be sudden, and waters deep,
      And the harbour bar be moaning.

Three corpses lay out on the shining sands
   In the morning gleam as the tide went down,
And the women are weeping and wringing their hands
   For those who will never come home to the town;
   For men must work, and women must weep,
   And the sooner it's over, the sooner to sleep;
      And good-bye to the bar and its moaning.

Eversley, June 25, 1851.



SONNET



Oh, thou hadst been a wife for Shakspeare's self!
No head, save some world-genius, ought to rest
Above the treasures of that perfect breast,
Or nightly draw fresh light from those keen stars
Through which thy soul awes ours:  yet thou art bound--
O waste of nature!--to a craven hound;
To shameless lust, and childish greed of pelf;
Athene to a Satyr:  was that link
Forged by The Father's hand?  Man's reason bars
The bans which God allowed.--Ay, so we think:
Forgetting, thou hadst weaker been, full blest,
   Than thus made strong by suffering; and more great
   In martyrdom, than throned as Caesar's mate.

Eversley, 1851.



MARGARET TO DOLCINO



Ask if I love thee?  Oh, smiles cannot tell
Plainer what tears are now showing too well.
Had I not loved thee, my sky had been clear:
Had I not loved thee, I had not been here,
      Weeping by thee.

Ask if I love thee?  How else could I borrow
Pride from man's slander, and strength from my sorrow?
Laugh when they sneer at the fanatic's bride,
Knowing no bliss, save to toil and abide
      Weeping by thee.

Andernach on the Rhine,
August 1851.



DOLCINO TO MARGARET



The world goes up and the world goes down,
   And the sunshine follows the rain;
And yesterday's sneer and yesterday's frown
   Can never come over again,
      Sweet wife:
   No, never come over again.

For woman is warm though man be cold,
   And the night will hallow the day;
Till the heart which at even was weary and old
   Can rise in the morning gay,
      Sweet wife;
   To its work in the morning gay.

Andernach, 1851.



THE UGLY PRINCESS



My parents bow, and lead them forth,
   For all the crowd to see--
Ah well! the people might not care
   To cheer a dwarf like me.

They little know how I could love,
   How I could plan and toil,
To swell those drudges' scanty gains,
   Their mites of rye and oil.

They little know what dreams have been
   My playmates, night and day;
Of equal kindness, helpful care,
   A mother's perfect sway.

Now earth to earth in convent walls,
   To earth in churchyard sod:
I was not good enough for man,
   And so am given to God.

Bertrich in the Eifel, 1851.



SONNET



The baby sings not on its mother's breast;
Nor nightingales who nestle side by side;
Nor I by thine:  but let us only part,
Then lips which should but kiss, and so be still,
As having uttered all, must speak again--
O stunted thoughts!  O chill and fettered rhyme
Yet my great bliss, though still entirely blest,
Losing its proper home, can find no rest:
   So, like a child who whiles away the time
With dance and carol till the eventide,
Watching its mother homeward through the glen;
Or nightingale, who, sitting far apart,
Tells to his listening mate within the nest
The wonder of his star-entranced heart
Till all the wakened woodlands laugh and thrill--
   Forth all my being bubbles into song;
   And rings aloft, not smooth, yet clear and strong.

Bertrich, 1851



THE SWAN-NECK



Evil sped the battle play
On the Pope Calixtus' day;
Mighty war-smiths, thanes and lords,
In Senlac slept the sleep of swords.
Harold Earl, shot over shield,
Lay along the autumn weald;
Slaughter such was never none
Since the Ethelings England won.
   Thither Lady Githa came,
Weeping sore for grief and shame;
How may she her first-born tell?
Frenchmen stript him where he fell,
Gashed and marred his comely face;
Who can know him in his place?
   Up and spake two brethren wise,
'Youngest hearts have keenest eyes;
Bird which leaves its mother's nest,
Moults its pinions, moults its crest.
Let us call the Swan-neck here,
She that was his leman dear;
She shall know him in this stound;
Foot of wolf, and scent of hound,
Eye of hawk, and wing of dove,
Carry woman to her love.'
   Up and spake the Swan-neck high,
'Go! to all your thanes let cry
How I loved him best of all,
I whom men his leman call;
Better knew his body fair
Than the mother which him bare.
When ye lived in wealth and glee
Then ye scorned to look on me;
God hath brought the proud ones low
After me afoot to go.'
   Rousing erne and sallow glede,
Rousing gray wolf off his feed,
Over franklin, earl, and thane,
Heaps of mother-naked slain,
Round the red field tracing slow,
Stooped that Swan-neck white as snow;
Never blushed nor turned away,
Till she found him where he lay;
Clipt him in her armes fair,
Wrapt him in her yellow hair,
Bore him from the battle-stead,
Saw him laid in pall of lead,
Took her to a minster high,
For Earl Harold's soul to cry.

   Thus fell Harold, bracelet-giver;
Jesu rest his soul for ever;
Angles all from thrall deliver;
      Miserere Domine.

Eversley, 1851.



A THOUGHT FROM THE RHINE



I heard an Eagle crying all alone
Above the vineyards through the summer night,
Among the skeletons of robber towers:
Because the ancient eyrie of his race
Was trenched and walled by busy-handed men;
And all his forest-chace and woodland wild,
Wherefrom he fed his young with hare and roe,
Were trim with grapes which swelled from hour to hour,
And tossed their golden tendrils to the sun
For joy at their own riches:--So, I thought,
The great devourers of the earth shall sit,
Idle and impotent, they know not why,
Down-staring from their barren height of state
On nations grown too wise to slay and slave,
The puppets of the few; while peaceful lore
And fellow-help make glad the heart of earth,
With wonders which they fear and hate, as he,
The Eagle, hates the vineyard slopes below.

On the Rhine, 1851.



THE LONGBEARDS' SAGA.  A.D. 400



Over the camp-fires
Drank I with heroes,
Under the Donau bank,
Warm in the snow trench:
Sagamen heard I there,
Men of the Longbeards,
Cunning and ancient,
Honey-sweet-voiced.
Scaring the wolf cub,
Scaring the horn-owl,
Shaking the snow-wreaths
Down from the pine-boughs,
Up to the star roof
Rang out their song.
Singing how Winil men,
Over the ice-floes
Sledging from Scanland
Came unto Scoring;
Singing of Gambara,
Freya's beloved,
Mother of Ayo,
Mother of Ibor.
Singing of Wendel men,
Ambri and Assi;
How to the Winilfolk
Went they with war-words,--
'Few are ye, strangers,
And many are we:
Pay us now toll and fee,
Cloth-yarn, and rings, and beeves:
Else at the raven's meal
Bide the sharp bill's doom.'
Clutching the dwarfs work then,
Clutching the bullock's shell,
Girding gray iron on,
Forth fared the Winils all,
Fared the Alruna's sons,
Ayo and Ibor.
Mad at heart stalked they:
Loud wept the women all,
Loud the Alruna wife;
Sore was their need.
Out of the morning land,
Over the snow-drifts,
Beautiful Freya came,
Tripping to Scoring.
White were the moorlands,
And frozen before her:
Green were the moorlands,
And blooming behind her.
Out of her gold locks
Shaking the spring flowers,
Out of her garments
Shaking the south wind,
Around in the birches
Awaking the throstles,
And making chaste housewives all
Long for their heroes home,
Loving and love-giving,
Came she to Scoring.
Came unto Gambara,
Wisest of Valas,--
'Vala, why weepest thou?
Far in the wide-blue,
High up in the Elfin-home,
Heard I thy weeping.'
'Stop not my weeping,
Till one can fight seven.
Sons have I, heroes tall,
First in the sword-play;
This day at the Wendels' hands
Eagles must tear them.
Their mothers, thrall-weary,
Must grind for the Wendels.'
Wept the Alruna wife;
Kissed her fair Freya:--
'Far off in the morning land,
High in Valhalla,
A window stands open;
Its sill is the snow-peaks,
Its posts are the waterspouts,
Storm-rack its lintel;
Gold cloud-flakes above
Are piled for the roofing,
Far up to the Elfin-home,
High in the wide-blue.
Smiles out each morning thence
Odin Allfather;
From under the cloud-eaves
Smiles out on the heroes,
Smiles on chaste housewives all,
Smiles on the brood-mares,
Smiles on the smiths' work:
And theirs is the sword-luck,
With them is the glory,--
So Odin hath sworn it,--
Who first in the morning
Shall meet him and greet him.'
Still the Alruna wept:--
'Who then shall greet him?
Women alone are here:
Far on the moorlands
Behind the war-lindens,
In vain for the bill's doom
Watch Winil heroes all,
One against seven.'
Sweetly the Queen laughed:--
'Hear thou my counsel now;
Take to thee cunning,
Beloved of Freya.
Take thou thy women-folk,
Maidens and wives:
Over your ankles
Lace on the white war-hose;
Over your bosoms
Link up the hard mail-nets;
Over your lips
Plait long tresses with cunning;--
So war-beasts full-bearded
King Odin shall deem you,
When off the gray sea-beach
At sunrise ye greet him.'

Night's son was driving
His golden-haired horses up;
Over the eastern firths
High flashed their manes.
Smiled from the cloud-eaves out
Allfather Odin,
Waiting the battle-sport:
Freya stood by him.
'Who are these heroes tall,--
Lusty-limbed Longbeards?
Over the swans' bath
Why cry they to me?
Bones should be crashing fast,
Wolves should be full-fed,
Where such, mad-hearted,
Swing hands in the sword-play.'

Sweetly laughed Freya:--
'A name thou hast given them,
Shames neither thee nor them,
Well can they wear it.
Give them the victory,
First have they greeted thee;
Give them the victory,
Yokefellow mine!
Maidens and wives are these,--
Wives of the Winils;
Few are their heroes
And far on the war-road,
So over the swans' bath
They cry unto thee.'

Royally laughed he then;
Dear was that craft to him,
Odin Allfather,
Shaking the clouds.
'Cunning are women all,
Bold and importunate!
Longbeards their name shall be,
Ravens shall thank them:
Where women are heroes,
What must the men be?
Theirs is the victory;
No need of me!'

Eversley, 1852.
From Hypatia.



SAINT MAURA.  A.D. 304



Thank God!  Those gazers' eyes are gone at last!
The guards are crouching underneath the rock;
The lights are fading in the town below,
Around the cottage which this morn was ours.
Kind sun, to set, and leave us here alone;
Alone upon our crosses with our God;
While all the angels watch us from the stars.
Kind moon, to shine so clear and full on him,
And bathe his limbs in glory, for a sign
Of what awaits him!  Oh look on him, Lord!
Look, and remember how he saved thy lamb!
   Oh listen to me, teacher, husband, love,
Never till now loved utterly!  Oh say,
Say you forgive me!  No--you must not speak:
You said it to me hours ago--long hours!
Now you must rest, and when to-morrow comes
Speak to the people, call them home to God,
A deacon on the Cross, as in the Church;
And plead from off the tree with outspread arms,
To show them that the Son of God endured
For them--and me.  Hush!  I alone will speak,
And while away the hours till dawn for you.
I know you have forgiven me; as I lay
Beneath your feet, while they were binding me,
I knew I was forgiven then!  When I cried
'Here am I, husband!  The lost lamb returned,
All re-baptized in blood!' and you said, 'Come!
Come to thy bride-bed, martyr, wife once more!'
From that same moment all my pain was gone;
And ever since those sightless eyes have smiled
Love--love!  Alas, those eyes!  They made me fall.
I could not bear to see them, bleeding, dark,
Never, no never to look into mine;
Never to watch me round the little room
Singing about my work, or flash on me
Looks bright with counsel.--Then they drove me mad
With talk of nameless tortures waiting you--
And I could save you!  You would hear your love--
They knew you loved me, cruel men!  And then--
Then came a dream; to say one little word,
One easy wicked word, we both might say,
And no one hear us, but the lictors round;
One tiny sprinkle of the incense grains,
And both, both free!  And life had just begun--
Only three months--short months--your wedded wife
Only three months within the cottage there--
Hoping I bore your child. . . .
Ah! husband!  Saviour!  God! think gently of me!
I am forgiven! . . .
   And then another dream;
A flash--so quick, I could not bear the blaze;
I could not see the smoke among the light--
To wander out through unknown lands, and lead
You by the hand through hamlet, port, and town,
On, on, until we died; and stand each day
To glory in you, as you preached and prayed
From rock and bourne-stone, with that voice, those words,
Mingled with fire and honey--you would wake,
Bend, save whole nations! would not that atone
For one short word?--ay, make it right, to save
You, you, to fight the battles of the Lord?
And so--and so--alas! you knew the rest!
You answered me. . . .
Ah cruel words!  No!  Blessed, godlike words.
You had done nobly had you struck me dead,
Instead of striking me to life!--the temptress! . . .
'Traitress! apostate! dead to God and me!'--
'The smell of death upon me?'--so it was!
True! true! well spoken, hero!  Oh they snapped,
Those words, my madness, like the angel's voice
Thrilling the graves to birth-pangs.  All was clear.
There was but one right thing in the world to do;
And I must do it. . . .  Lord, have mercy!  Christ!
Help through my womanhood:  or I shall fail
Yet, as I failed before! . . .  I could not speak--
I could not speak for shame and misery,
And terror of my sin, and of the things
I knew were coming:  but in heaven, in heaven!
There we should meet, perhaps--and by that time
I might be worthy of you once again--
Of you, and of my God. . . .  So I went out.
. . . . . .
Will you hear more, and so forget the pain?
And yet I dread to tell you what comes next;
Your love will feel it all again for me.
No! it is over; and the woe that's dead
Rises next hour a glorious angel.  Love!
Say, shall I tell you?  Ah! your lips are dry!
To-morrow, when they come, we must entreat,
And they will give you water.  One to-day,
A soldier, gave me water in a sponge
Upon a reed, and said, 'Too fair! too young!
She might have been a gallant soldier's wife!'
And then I cried, 'I am a soldier's wife!
A hero's!'  And he smiled, but let me drink.
God bless him for it!
   So they led me back:
And as I went, a voice was in my ears
Which rang through all the sunlight, and the breath
And blaze of all the garden slopes below,
And through the harvest-voices, and the moan
Of cedar-forests on the cliffs above,
And round the shining rivers, and the peaks
Which hung beyond the cloud-bed of the west,
And round the ancient stones about my feet.
Out of all heaven and earth it rang, and cried,
'My hand hath made all these.  Am I too weak
To give thee strength to say so?'  Then my soul
Spread like a clear blue sky within my breast,
While all the people made a ring around,
And in the midst the judge spoke smilingly--
'Well! hast thou brought him to a better mind?'
'No!  He has brought me to a better mind!'--
I cried, and said beside--I know not what--
Words which I learnt from thee--I trust in God
Nought fierce or rude--for was I not a girl
Three months ago beneath my mother's roof?
I thought of that.  She might be there!  I looked--
She was not there!  I hid my face and wept.
And when I looked again, the judge's eye
Was on me, cold and steady, deep in thought--
'She knows what shame is still; so strip her.'  'Ah!'
I shrieked, 'Not that, Sir!  Any pain!  So young
I am--a wife too--I am not my own,
But his--my husband's!'  But they took my shawl,
And tore my tunic off, and there I stood
Before them all. . . .  Husband! you love me still?
Indeed I pleaded!  Oh, shine out, kind moon,
And let me see him smile!  Oh! how I prayed,
While some cried 'Shame!' and some, 'She is too young!'
And some mocked--ugly words:  God shut my ears.
And yet no earthquake came to swallow me.
While all the court around, and walls, and roofs,
And all the earth and air were full of eyes,
Eyes, eyes, which scorched my limbs like burning flame,
Until my brain seemed bursting from my brow:
And yet no earthquake came!  And then I knew
This body was not yours alone, but God's--
His loan--He needed it:  and after that
The worst was come, and any torture more
A change--a lightening; and I did not shriek--
Once only--once, when first I felt the whip--
It coiled so keen around my side, and sent
A fire-flash through my heart which choked me--then
I shrieked--that once.  The foolish echo rang
So far and long--I prayed you might not hear.
And then a mist, which hid the ring of eyes,
Swam by me, and a murmur in my ears
Of humming bees around the limes at home;
And I was all alone with you and God.
And what they did to me I hardly know;
I felt, and did not feel.  Now I look back,
It was not after all so very sharp:
So do not pity me.  It made me pray;
Forget my shame in pain, and pain in you,
And you in God:  and once, when I looked down,
And saw an ugly sight--so many wounds!
'What matter?' thought I.  'His dear eyes are dark;
For them alone I kept these limbs so white--
A foolish pride!  As God wills now.  'Tis just.'
   But then the judge spoke out in haste:  'She is mad,
Or fenced by magic arts!  She feels no pain!'
He did not know I was on fire within:
Better he should not; so his sin was less.
Then he cried fiercely, 'Take the slave away,
And crucify her by her husband's side!'
And at those words a film came on my face--
A sickening rush of joy--was that the end?
That my reward?  I rose, and tried to go--
But all the eyes had vanished, and the judge;
And all the buildings melted into mist:
So how they brought me here I cannot tell--
Here, here, by you, until the judgment-day,
And after that for ever and for ever!
Ah!  If I could but reach that hand!  One touch!
One finger tip, to send the thrill through me
I felt but yesterday!--No!  I can wait:--
Another body!--Oh, new limbs are ready,
Free, pure, instinct with soul through every nerve,
Kept for us in the treasuries of God.
They will not mar the love they try to speak,
They will not fail my soul, as these have done!
. . . . .
Will you hear more?  Nay--you know all the rest:
Yet those poor eyes--alas! they could not see
My waking, when you hung above me there
With hands outstretched to bless the penitent--
Your penitent--even like The Lord Himself--
I gloried in you!--like The Lord Himself!
Sharing His very sufferings, to the crown
Of thorns which they had put on that dear brow
To make you like Him--show you as you were!
I told them so!  I bid them look on you,
And see there what was the highest throne on earth--
The throne of suffering, where the Son of God
Endured and triumphed for them.  But they laughed;
All but one soldier, gray, with many scars;
And he stood silent.  Then I crawled to you,
And kissed your bleeding feet, and called aloud--
You heard me!  You know all!  I am at peace.
Peace, peace, as still and bright as is the moon
Upon your limbs, came on me at your smile,
And kept me happy, when they dragged me back
From that last kiss, and spread me on the cross,
And bound my wrists and ankles--Do not sigh:
I prayed, and bore it:  and since they raised me up
My eyes have never left your face, my own, my own,
Nor will, till death comes! . . .
   Do I feel much pain?
Not much.  Not maddening.  None I cannot bear.
It has become like part of my own life,
Or part of God's life in me--honour--bliss!
I dreaded madness, and instead comes rest;
Rest deep and smiling, like a summer's night.
I should be easy, now, if I could move . . .
I cannot stir.  Ah God! these shoots of fire
Through all my limbs!  Hush, selfish girl!  He hears you!
Who ever found the cross a pleasant bed?
Yes; I can bear it, love.  Pain is no evil
Unless it conquers us.  These little wrists, now--
You said, one blessed night, they were too slender,
Too soft and slender for a deacon's wife--
Perhaps a martyr's:--You forgot the strength
Which God can give.  The cord has cut them through;
And yet my voice has never faltered yet.
Oh! do not groan, or I shall long and pray
That you may die:  and you must not die yet.
Not yet--they told us we might live three days . . .
Two days for you to preach!  Two days to speak
Words which may wake the dead!
. . . . .
   Hush! is he sleeping?
They say that men have slept upon the cross;
So why not he? . . .  Thanks, Lord!  I hear him breathe:
And he will preach Thy word to-morrow!--save
Souls, crowds, for Thee!  And they will know his worth
Years hence--poor things, they know not what they do!--
And crown him martyr; and his name will ring
Through all the shores of earth, and all the stars
Whose eyes are sparkling through their tears to see
His triumph--Preacher!  Martyr!--Ah--and me?--
If they must couple my poor name with his,
Let them tell all the truth--say how I loved him,
And tried to damn him by that love!  O Lord!
Returning good for evil! and was this
The payment I deserved for such a sin?
To hang here on my cross, and look at him
Until we kneel before Thy throne in heaven!

Eversley, 1852.



ON THE DEATH OF A CERTAIN JOURNAL {282}



So die, thou child of stormy dawn,
Thou winter flower, forlorn of nurse;
Chilled early by the bigot's curse,
The pedant's frown, the worldling's yawn.

Fair death, to fall in teeming June,
When every seed which drops to earth
Takes root, and wins a second birth
From steaming shower and gleaming moon.

Fall warm, fall fast, thou mellow rain;
Thou rain of God, make fat the land;
That roots which parch in burning sand
May bud to flower and fruit again.

To grace, perchance, a fairer morn
In mightier lands beyond the sea,
While honour falls to such as we
From hearts of heroes yet unborn,

Who in the light of fuller day,
Of purer science, holier laws,
Bless us, faint heralds of their cause,
Dim beacons of their glorious way.

Failure?  While tide-floods rise and boil
Round cape and isle, in port and cove,
Resistless, star-led from above:
What though our tiny wave recoil?

Eversley, 1852.



DOWN TO THE MOTHERS



Linger no more, my beloved, by abbey and cell and cathedral;
Mourn not for holy ones mourning of old them who knew not the Father,
Weeping with fast and scourge, when the bridegroom was taken from them.
Drop back awhile through the years, to the warm rich youth of the nations,
Childlike in virtue and faith, though childlike in passion and pleasure,
Childlike still, and still near to their God, while the day-spring of Eden
Lingered in rose-red rays on the peaks of Ionian mountains.
Down to the mothers, as Faust went, I go, to the roots of our manhood,
Mothers of us in our cradles; of us once more in our glory.
New-born, body and soul, in the great pure world which shall be
In the renewing of all things, when man shall return to his Eden
Conquering evil, and death, and shame, and the slander of conscience--
Free in the sunshine of Godhead--and fearlessly smile on his Father.
Down to the mothers I go--yet with thee still!--be with me, thou purest!
Lead me, thy hand in my hand; and the dayspring of God go before us.

Eversley, 1852.



TO MISS MITFORD:  AUTHORESS OF 'OUR VILLAGE'



The single eye, the daughter of the light;
Well pleased to recognise in lowliest shade
Some glimmer of its parent beam, and made
By daily draughts of brightness, inly bright.
The taste severe, yet graceful, trained aright
In classic depth and clearness, and repaid
By thanks and honour from the wise and staid--
By pleasant skill to blame, and yet delight,
And high communion with the eloquent throng
Of those who purified our speech and song--
All these are yours.  The same examples lure,
You in each woodland, me on breezy moor--
With kindred aim the same sweet path along,
To knit in loving knowledge rich and poor.

Eversley, 1853.



BALLAD OF EARL HALDAN'S DAUGHTER



   It was Earl Haldan's daughter,
      She looked across the sea;
   She looked across the water;
      And long and loud laughed she:
   'The locks of six princesses
      Must be my marriage fee,
So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
      Who comes a wooing me?'

   It was Earl Haldan's daughter,
      She walked along the sand;
   When she was aware of a knight so fair,
      Came sailing to the land.
   His sails were all of velvet,
      His mast of beaten gold,
And 'Hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
      Who saileth here so bold?'

   'The locks of five princesses
      I won beyond the sea;
   I clipt their golden tresses,
      To fringe a cloak for thee.
   One handful yet is wanting,
      But one of all the tale;
So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
      Furl up thy velvet sail!'

   He leapt into the water,
      That rover young and bold;
   He gript Earl Haldan's daughter,
      He clipt her locks of gold:
   'Go weep, go weep, proud maiden,
      The tale is full to-day.
Now hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
      Sail Westward ho! away!'

Devonshire, 1854
   From Westward Ho!



FRANK LEIGH'S SONG.  A.D. 1586



Ah tyrant Love, Megaera's serpents bearing,
   Why thus requite my sighs with venom'd smart?
Ah ruthless dove, the vulture's talons wearing,
   Why flesh them, traitress, in this faithful heart?
Is this my meed?  Must dragons' teeth alone
In Venus' lawns by lovers' hands be sown?

Nay, gentlest Cupid; 'twas my pride undid me;
   Nay, guiltless dove; by mine own wound I fell.
To worship, not to wed, Celestials bid me:
   I dreamt to mate in heaven, and wake in hell;
For ever doom'd, Ixion-like, to reel
On mine own passions' ever-burning wheel.

Devonshire, 1854.
   From Westward Ho!



ODE TO THE NORTH-EAST WIND



Welcome, wild North-easter.
   Shame it is to see
Odes to every zephyr;
   Ne'er a verse to thee.
Welcome, black North-easter!
   O'er the German foam;
O'er the Danish moorlands,
   From thy frozen home.
Tired we are of summer,
   Tired of gaudy glare,
Showers soft and steaming,
   Hot and breathless air.
Tired of listless dreaming,
   Through the lazy day:
Jovial wind of winter
   Turns us out to play!
Sweep the golden reed-beds;
   Crisp the lazy dyke;
Hunger into madness
   Every plunging pike.
Fill the lake with wild-fowl;
   Fill the marsh with snipe;
While on dreary moorlands
   Lonely curlew pipe.
Through the black fir-forest
   Thunder harsh and dry,
Shattering down the snow-flakes
   Off the curdled sky.
Hark!  The brave North-easter!
   Breast-high lies the scent,
On by holt and headland,
   Over heath and bent.
Chime, ye dappled darlings,
   Through the sleet and snow.
Who can over-ride you?
   Let the horses go!
Chime, ye dappled darlings,
   Down the roaring blast;
You shall see a fox die
   Ere an hour be past.
Go! and rest to-morrow,
   Hunting in your dreams,
While our skates are ringing
   O'er the frozen streams.
Let the luscious South-wind
   Breathe in lovers' sighs,
While the lazy gallants
   Bask in ladies' eyes.
What does he but soften
   Heart alike and pen?
'Tis the hard gray weather
   Breeds hard English men.
What's the soft South-wester?
   'Tis the ladies' breeze,
Bringing home their true-loves
   Out of all the seas:
But the black North-easter,
   Through the snowstorm hurled,
Drives our English hearts of oak
   Seaward round the world.
Come, as came our fathers,
   Heralded by thee,
Conquering from the eastward,
   Lords by land and sea.
Come; and strong within us
   Stir the Vikings' blood;
Bracing brain and sinew;
   Blow, thou wind of God!

1854.



A FAREWELL:  TO C. E. G.



My fairest child, I have no song to give you;
   No lark could pipe in skies so dull and gray;
Yet, if you will, one quiet hint I'll leave you,
      For every day.

I'll tell you how to sing a clearer carol
   Than lark who hails the dawn or breezy down
To earn yourself a purer poet's laurel
      Than Shakespeare's crown.

Be good, sweet maid, and let who can be clever;
   Do lovely things, not dream them, all day long;
And so make Life, and Death, and that For Ever,
      One grand sweet song.

February 1, 1856.



TO G. A. G.



A hasty jest I once let fall--
   As jests are wont to be, untrue--
   As if the sum of joy to you
Were hunt and picnic, rout and ball.

Your eyes met mine:  I did not blame;
   You saw it:  but I touched too near
   Some noble nerve; a silent tear
Spoke soft reproach, and lofty shame.

I do not wish those words unsaid.
   Unspoilt by praise and pleasure, you
   In that one look to woman grew,
While with a child, I thought, I played.

Next to mine own beloved so long!
   I have not spent my heart in vain.
   I watched the blade; I see the grain;
A woman's soul, most soft, yet strong.

Eversley, 1856.



THE SOUTH WIND:  A FISHERMAN'S BLESSINGS



O blessed drums of Aldershot!
   O blessed South-west train!
O blessed, blessed Speaker's clock,
   All prophesying rain!

O blessed yaffil, laughing loud!
   O blessed falling glass!
O blessed fan of cold gray cloud!
   O blessed smelling grass!

O bless'd South wind that toots his horn
   Through every hole and crack!
I'm off at eight to-morrow morn,
   To bring _such_ fishes back!

Eversley, April 1, 1856.



THE INVITATION:  TO TOM HUGHES



Come away with me, Tom,
Term and talk are done;
My poor lads are reaping,
Busy every one.
Curates mind the parish,
Sweepers mind the court;
We'll away to Snowdon
For our ten days' sport;
Fish the August evening
Till the eve is past,
Whoop like boys, at pounders
Fairly played and grassed.
When they cease to dimple,
Lunge, and swerve, and leap,
Then up over Siabod,
Choose our nest, and sleep.
Up a thousand feet, Tom,
Round the lion's head,
Find soft stones to leeward
And make up our bed.
Eat our bread and bacon,
Smoke the pipe of peace,
And, ere we be drowsy,
Give our boots a grease.
Homer's heroes did so,
Why not such as we?
What are sheets and servants?
Superfluity!
Pray for wives and children
Safe in slumber curled,
Then to chat till midnight
O'er this babbling world--
Of the workmen's college,
Of the price of grain,
Of the tree of knowledge,
Of the chance of rain;
If Sir A. goes Romeward,
If Miss B. sings true,
If the fleet comes homeward,
If the mare will do,--
Anything and everything--
Up there in the sky
Angels understand us,
And no 'saints' are by.
Down, and bathe at day-dawn,
Tramp from lake to lake,
Washing brain and heart clean
Every step we take.
Leave to Robert Browning
Beggars, fleas, and vines;
Leave to mournful Ruskin
Popish Apennines,
Dirty Stones of Venice
And his Gas-lamps Seven--
We've the stones of Snowdon
And the lamps of heaven.
Where's the mighty credit
In admiring Alps?
Any goose sees 'glory'
In their 'snowy scalps.'
Leave such signs and wonders
For the dullard brain,
As aesthetic brandy,
Opium and cayenne.
Give me Bramshill common
(St. John's harriers by),
Or the vale of Windsor,
England's golden eye.
Show me life and progress,
Beauty, health, and man;
Houses fair, trim gardens,
Turn where'er I can.
Or, if bored with 'High Art,'
And such popish stuff,
One's poor ear need airing,
Snowdon's high enough.
While we find God's signet
Fresh on English ground,
Why go gallivanting
With the nations round?
Though we try no ventures
Desperate or strange;
Feed on commonplaces
In a narrow range;
Never sought for Franklin
Round the frozen Capes;
Even, with Macdougall, {295}
Bagged our brace of apes;
Never had our chance, Tom,
In that black Redan;
Can't avenge poor Brereton
Out in Sakarran;
Tho' we earn our bread, Tom,
By the dirty pen,
What we can we will be,
Honest Englishmen.
Do the work that's nearest,
Though it's dull at whiles,
Helping, when we meet them,
Lame dogs over stiles;
See in every hedgerow
Marks of angels' feet,
Epics in each pebble
Underneath our feet;
Once a year, like schoolboys,
Robin-Hooding go,
Leaving fops and fogies
A thousand feet below.

Eversley, August 1856.



THE FIND



   Yon sound's neither sheep-bell nor bark,
   They're running--they're running, Go hark!
   The sport may be lost by a moment's delay;
   So whip up the puppies and scurry away.
Dash down through the cover by dingle and dell,
There's a gate at the bottom--I know it full well;
And they're running--they're running,
      Go hark!

   They're running--they're running, Go hark!
   One fence and we're out of the park;
   Sit down in your saddles and race at the brook,
   Then smash at the bullfinch; no time for a look;
Leave cravens and skirters to dangle behind;
He's away for the moors in the teeth of the wind,
And they're running--they're running,
      Go hark!

   They're running--they're running, Go hark!
   Let them run on and run till it's dark!
   Well with them we are, and well with them we'll be,
   While there's wind in our horses and daylight to see:
Then shog along homeward, chat over the fight,
And hear in our dreams the sweet music all night
Of--They're running--they're running,
      Go hark!

Eversley, 1856.



FISHING SONG:  TO J. A. FROUDE AND TOM HUGHES



      Oh, Mr. Froude, how wise and good,
         To point us out this way to glory--
      They're no great shakes, those Snowdon Lakes,
         And all their pounders myth and story.
Blow Snowdon!  What's Lake Gwynant to Killarney,
Or spluttering Welsh to tender blarney, blarney, blarney?

      So Thomas Hughes, sir, if you choose,
         I'll tell you where we think of going,
      To swate and far o'er cliff and scar,
         Hear horns of Elfland faintly blowing;
Blow Snowdon!  There's a hundred lakes to try in,
And fresh caught salmon daily, frying, frying, frying.

      Geology and botany
         A hundred wonders shall diskiver,
      We'll flog and troll in strid and hole,
         And skim the cream of lake and river,
Blow Snowdon! give me Ireland for my pennies,
Hurrah! for salmon, grilse, and--Dennis, Dennis, Dennis!

Eversley, 1856



THE LAST BUCCANEER



Oh England is a pleasant place for them that's rich and high,
But England is a cruel place for such poor folks as I;
And such a port for mariners I ne'er shall see again
As the pleasant Isle of Aves, beside the Spanish main.

There were forty craft in Aves that were both swift and stout,
All furnished well with small arms and cannons round about;
And a thousand men in Aves made laws so fair and free
To choose their valiant captains and obey them loyally.

Thence we sailed against the Spaniard with his hoards of plate and gold,
Which he wrung with cruel tortures from Indian folk of old;
Likewise the merchant captains, with hearts as hard as stone,
Who flog men and keel-haul them, and starve them to the bone.

Oh the palms grew high in Aves, and fruits that shone like gold,
And the colibris and parrots they were gorgeous to behold;
And the negro maids to Aves from bondage fast did flee,
To welcome gallant sailors, a-sweeping in from sea.

Oh sweet it was in Aves to hear the landward breeze,
A-swing with good tobacco in a net between the trees,
With a negro lass to fan you, while you listened to the roar
Of the breakers on the reef outside, that never touched the shore.

But Scripture saith, an ending to all fine things must be;
So the King's ships sailed on Aves, and quite put down were we.
All day we fought like bulldogs, but they burst the booms at night;
And I fled in a piragua, sore wounded, from the fight.

Nine days I floated starving, and a negro lass beside,
Till for all I tried to cheer her, the poor young thing she died;
But as I lay a gasping, a Bristol sail came by,
And brought me home to England here, to beg until I die.

And now I'm old and going--I'm sure I can't tell where;
One comfort is, this world's so hard, I can't be worse off there:
If I might but be a sea-dove, I'd fly across the main,
To the pleasant Isle of Aves, to look at it once again.

Eversley, 1857,



THE KNIGHT'S RETURN



Hark! hark! hark!
The lark sings high in the dark.
The were wolves mutter, the night hawks moan,
The raven croaks from the Raven-stone;
What care I for his boding groan,
Riding the moorland to come to mine own?
Hark! hark! hark!
The lark sings high in the dark.

Hark! hark! hark!
The lark sings high in the dark.
Long have I wander'd by land and by sea,
Long have I ridden by moorland and lea;
Yonder she sits with my babe on her knee,
Sits at the window and watches for me!
Hark! hark! hark!
The lark sings high in the dark.

Written for music, 1857.



PEN-Y-GWRYDD:  TO TOM HUGHES, ESQ.



There is no inn in Snowdon which is not awful dear,
Excepting Pen-y-gwrydd (you can't pronounce it, dear),
Which standeth in the meeting of noble valleys three--
One is the vale of Gwynant, so well beloved by me,
One goes to Capel-Curig, and I can't mind its name,
And one it is Llanberris Pass, which all men knows the same;
Between which radiations vast mountains does arise,
As full of tarns as sieves of holes, in which big fish will rise,
That is, just one day in the year, if you be there, my boy,
Just about ten o'clock at night; and then I wish you joy.
Now to this Pen-y-gwrydd inn I purposeth to write,
(Axing the post town out of Froude, for I can't mind it quite),
And to engage a room or two, for let us say a week,
For fear of gents, and Manichees, and reading parties meek,
And there to live like fighting-cocks at almost a bob a day,
And arterwards toward the sea make tracks and cut away,
All for to catch the salmon bold in Aberglaslyn pool,
And work the flats in Traeth-Mawr, and will, or I'm a fool.
And that's my game, which if you like, respond to me by post;
But I fear it will not last, my son, a thirteen days at most.
Flies is no object; I can tell some three or four will do,
And John Jones, Clerk, he knows the rest, and ties and sells 'em too.
Besides of which I have no more to say, leastwise just now,
And so, goes to my children's school and 'umbly makes my bow.

Eversley, 1857.



ODE ON THE INSTALLATION OF THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE, CHANCELLOR OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, 1862  {303}



Hence a while, severer Muses;
Spare your slaves till drear October.
Hence; for Alma Mater chooses
Not to be for ever sober:
But, like stately matron gray,
Calling child and grandchild round her,
Will for them at least be gay;
Share for once their holiday;
And, knowing she will sleep the sounder,
Cheerier-hearted on the morrow
Rise to grapple care and sorrow,
Grandly leads the dance adown, and joins the children's play.
      So go, for in your places
      Already, as you see,
(Her tears for some deep sorrow scarcely dried),
Venus holds court among her sinless graces,
With many a nymph from many a park and lea.
She, pensive, waits the merrier faces
Of those your wittier sisters three,
O'er jest and dance and song who still preside,
To cheer her in this merry-mournful tide;
   And bids us, as she smiles or sighs,
   Tune our fancies by her eyes.

   Then let the young be glad,
   Fair girl and gallant lad,
   And sun themselves to-day
   By lawn and garden gay;
   'Tis play befits the noon
   Of rosy-girdled June:
   Who dare frown if heaven shall smile?
   Blest, who can forget a while;
   The world before them, and above
   The light of universal love.
Go, then, let the young be gay;
From their heart as from their dress
Let darkness and let mourning pass away,
While we the staid and worn look on and bless.

   Health to courage firm and high!
   Health to Granta's chivalry!
   Wisely finding, day by day,
   Play in toil, and toil in play.
   Granta greets them, gliding down
   On by park and spire and town;
   Humming mills and golden meadows,
   Barred with elm and poplar shadows;
   Giant groves, and learned halls;
   Holy fanes and pictured walls.
   Yet she bides not here; around
   Lies the Muses' sacred ground.
   Most she lingers, where below
   Gliding wherries come and go;
   Stalwart footsteps shake the shores;
   Rolls the pulse of stalwart oars;
   Rings aloft the exultant cry
   For the bloodless victory.
   There she greets the sports, which breed
   Valiant lads for England's need;
   Wisely finding, day by day,
   Play in toil, and toil in play.
   Health to courage, firm and high!
   Health to Granta's chivalry!

Yet stay a while, severer Muses, stay,
For you, too, have your rightful parts to-day.
Known long to you, and known through you to fame,
Are Chatsworth's halls, and Cavendish's name.
You too, then, Alma Mater calls to greet
A worthy patron for your ancient seat;
And bid her sons from him example take,
Of learning purely sought for learning's sake,
Of worth unboastful, power in duty spent;
And see, fulfilled in him, her high intent.

      Come, Euterpe, wake thy choir;
      Fit thy notes to our desire.
      Long may he sit the chiefest here,
      Meet us and greet us, year by year;
      Long inherit, sire and son,
      All that their race has wrought and won,
      Since that great Cavendish came again,
      Round the world and over the main,
      Breasting the Thames with his mariners bold,
      Past good Queen Bess's palace of old;
      With jewel and ingot packed in his hold,
      And sails of damask and cloth of gold;
      While never a sailor-boy on board
      But was decked as brave as a Spanish lord,
         With the spoils he had won
         In the Isles of the Sun,
         And the shores of Fairy-land,
      And yet held for the crown of the goodly show,
      That queenly smile from the Palace window,
         And that wave of a queenly hand.
      Yes, let the young be gay,
      And sun themselves to-day;--
   And from their hearts, as from their dress,
      Let mourning pass away.
But not from us, who watch our years fast fleeing,
And snatching as they flee, fresh fragments of our being.
      Can we forget one friend,
      Can we forget one face,
      Which cheered us toward our end,
      Which nerved us for our race?
      Oh sad to toil, and yet forego
      One presence which has made us know
      To Godlike souls how deep our debt!
      We would not, if we could, forget.

      Severer Muses, linger yet;
   Speak out for us one pure and rich regret.
   Thou, Clio, who, with awful pen,
   Gravest great names upon the hearts of men,
   Speak of a fate beyond our ken;
   A gem late found and lost too soon; {306}
   A sun gone down at highest noon;
   A tree from Odin's ancient root,
   Which bore for men the ancient fruit,
   Counsel, and faith and scorn of wrong,
   And cunning lore, and soothing song,
   Snapt in mid-growth, and leaving unaware
   The flock unsheltered and the pasture bare
   Nay, let us take what God shall send,
   Trusting bounty without end.
   God ever lives; and Nature,
   Beneath His high dictature,
   Hale and teeming, can replace
   Strength by strength, and grace by grace,
   Hope by hope, and friend by friend:
   Trust; and take what God shall send.
   So shall Alma Mater see
      Daughters fair and wise
   Train new lands of liberty
      Under stranger skies;
   Spreading round the teeming earth
   English science, manhood, worth.

1862.



SONGS FROM 'THE WATER-BABIES'



THE TIDE RIVER

   Clear and cool, clear and cool,
By laughing shallow, and dreaming pool;
   Cool and clear, cool and clear,
By shining shingle, and foaming wear;
Under the crag where the ouzel sings,
And the ivied wall where the church-bell rings,
      Undefiled, for the undefiled;
   Play by me, bathe in me, mother and child.

      Dank and foul, dank and foul,
   By the smoky town in its murky cowl;
      Foul and dank, foul and dank,
   By wharf and sewer and slimy bank;
Darker and darker the farther I go,
Baser and baser the richer I grow;
      Who dare sport with the sin-defiled?
   Shrink from me, turn from me, mother and child.

      Strong and free, strong and free,
   The floodgates are open, away to the sea.
      Free and strong, free and strong,
   Cleansing my streams as I hurry along
To the golden sands, and the leaping bar,
And the taintless tide that awaits me afar,
As I lose myself in the infinite main,
Like a soul that has sinned and is pardoned again.
      Undefiled, for the undefiled;
   Play by me, bathe in me, mother and child.

From The Water-Babies.
Eversley, 1862.


YOUNG AND OLD


When all the world is young, lad,
   And all the trees are green;
And every goose a swan, lad,
   And every lass a queen;
Then hey for boot and horse, lad,
   And round the world away;
Young blood must have its course, lad,
   And every dog his day.

When all the world is old, lad,
   And all the trees are brown;
And all the sport is stale, lad,
   And all the wheels run down;
Creep home, and take your place there,
   The spent and maimed among:
God grant you find one face there,
   You loved when all was young.

From The Water-Babies.  1862


THE SUMMER SEA


   Soft soft wind, from out the sweet south sliding,
Waft thy silver cloud webs athwart the summer sea;
   Thin thin threads of mist on dewy fingers twining
Weave a veil of dappled gauze to shade my babe and me.

   Deep deep Love, within thine own abyss abiding,
Pour Thyself abroad, O Lord, on earth and air and sea;
   Worn weary hearts within Thy holy temple hiding,
Shield from sorrow, sin, and shame my helpless babe and me.

From The Water-Babies.  1862


MY LITTLE DOLL


I once had a sweet little doll, dears,
   The prettiest doll in the world;
Her cheeks were so red and so white, dears,
   And her hair was so charmingly curled.
But I lost my poor little doll, dears,
   As I played in the heath one day;
And I cried for more than a week, dears,
   But I never could find where she lay.

I found my poor little doll, dears,
   As I played in the heath one day:
Folks say she is terribly changed, dears,
   For her paint is all washed away,
And her arms trodden off by the cows, dears
   And her hair not the least bit curled:
Yet for old sakes' sake she is still, dears,
   The prettiest doll in the world.

From The Water-Babies.
Eversley, 1862.



THE KNIGHT'S LEAP:  A LEGEND OF ALTENAHR



'So the foemen have fired the gate, men of mine;
   And the water is spent and gone?
Then bring me a cup of the red Ahr-wine:
   I never shall drink but this one.

'And reach me my harness, and saddle my horse,
   And lead him me round to the door:
He must take such a leap to-night perforce,
   As horse never took before.

'I have fought my fight, I have lived my life,
   I have drunk my share of wine;
From Trier to Coln there was never a knight
   Led a merrier life than mine.

'I have lived by the saddle for years two score;
   And if I must die on tree,
Then the old saddle tree, which has borne me of yore,
   Is the properest timber for me.

'So now to show bishop, and burgher, and priest,
   How the Altenahr hawk can die:
If they smoke the old falcon out of his nest,
   He must take to his wings and fly.'

He harnessed himself by the clear moonshine,
   And he mounted his horse at the door;
And he drained such a cup of the red Ahr-wine,
   As man never drained before.

He spurred the old horse, and he held him tight,
   And he leapt him out over the wall;
Out over the cliff, out into the night,
   Three hundred feet of fall.

They found him next morning below in the glen,
   With never a bone in him whole--
A mass or a prayer, now, good gentlemen,
   For such a bold rider's soul.

Eversley, 1864.



THE SONG OF THE LITTLE BALTUNG.  A.D. 395



A harper came over the Danube so wide,
   And he came into Alaric's hall,
And he sang the song of the little Baltung
   To him and his heroes all.

How the old old Balt and the young young Balt
   Rode out of Caucaland,
With the royal elephant's trunk on helm
   And the royal lance in hand.

Thuringer heroes, counts and knights,
   Pricked proud in their meinie;
For they were away to the great Kaiser,
   In Byzant beside the sea.

And when they came to the Danube so wide
   They shouted from off the shore,
'Come over, come over, ye Roman slaves,
   And ferry your masters o'er.'

And when they came to Adrian's burgh,
   With its towers so smooth and high,
'Come out, come out, ye Roman knaves,
   And see your lords ride by.'

But when they came lo the long long walls
   That stretch from sea to sea,
That old old Balt let down his chin,
   And a thoughtful man grew he.

'Oh oft have I scoffed at brave Fridigern,
   But never will I scoff more,
If these be the walls which kept him out
   From the Micklegard there on the shore.'

Then out there came the great Kaiser,
   With twice ten thousand men;
But never a Thuring was coward enough
   To wish himself home again.

'Bow down, thou rebel, old Athanarich,
   And beg thy life this day;
The Kaiser is lord of all the world,
   And who dare say him nay?'

'I never came out of Caucaland
   To beg for less nor more;
But to see the pride of the great Kaiser,
   In his Micklegard here by the shore.

'I never came out of Caucaland
   To bow to mortal wight,
But to shake the hand of the great Kaiser,
   And God defend my right.'

He shook his hand, that cunning Kaiser,
   And he kissed him courteouslie,
And he has ridden with Athanarich
   That wonder-town to see.

He showed him his walls of marble white--
   A mile o'erhead they shone;
Quoth the Balt, 'Who would leap into that garden,
   King Siegfried's boots must own.'

He showed him his engines of arsmetrick
   And his wells of quenchless flame,
And his flying rocks, that guarded his walls
   From all that against him came.

He showed him his temples and pillared halls,
   And his streets of houses high;
And his watch-towers tall, where his star-gazers
   Sit reading the signs of the sky.

He showed him his ships with their hundred oars,
   And their sides like a castle wall,
That fetch home the plunder of all the world,
   At the Kaiser's beck and call.

He showed him all nations of every tongue
   That are bred beneath the sun,
How they flowed together in Micklegard street
   As the brooks flow all into one.

He showed him the shops of the china ware,
   And of silk and sendal also,
And he showed him the baths and the waterpipes
   On arches aloft that go.

He showed him ostrich and unicorn,
   Ape, lion, and tiger keen;
And elephants wise roared 'Hail Kaiser!'
   As though they had Christians been.

He showed him the hoards of the dragons and trolls,
   Rare jewels and heaps of gold--
'Hast thou seen, in all thy hundred years,
   Such as these, thou king so old?'

Now that cunning Kaiser was a scholar wise,
   And could of gramarye,
And he cast a spell on that old old Balt,
   Till lowly and meek spake he.

'Oh oft have I heard of the Micklegard,
   What I held for chapmen's lies;
But now do I know of the Micklegard,
   By the sight of mine own eyes.

'Woden in Valhalla,
   But thou on earth art God;
And he that dare withstand thee, Kaiser,
   On his own head lies his blood.'

Then out and spake that little Baltung,
   Rode at the king's right knee,
Quoth 'Fridigern slew false Kaiser Valens,
   And he died like you or me.'

'And who art thou, thou pretty bold boy,
   Rides at the king's right knee?'
'Oh I am the Baltung, boy Alaric,
   And as good a man as thee.'

'As good as me, thou pretty bold boy,
   With down upon thy chin?'
'Oh a spae-wife laid a doom on me,
   The best of thy realm to win.'

'If thou be so fierce, thou little wolf cub
   Or ever thy teeth be grown;
Then I must guard my two young sons
   Lest they should lose their own.'

'Oh, it's I will guard your two lither lads,
   In their burgh beside the sea,
And it's I will prove true man to them
   If they will prove true to me.

'But it's you must warn your two lither lads,
   And warn them bitterly,
That if I shall find them two false Kaisers,
   High hanged they both shall be.'

Now they are gone into the Kaiser's palace
   To eat the peacock fine,
And they are gone into the Kaiser's palace
   To drink the good Greek wine.

The Kaiser alone, and the old old Balt,
   They sat at the cedar board;
And round them served on the bended knee
   Full many a Roman lord.

'What ails thee, what ails thee, friend Athanarich?
   What makes thee look so pale?'
'I fear I am poisoned, thou cunning Kaiser,
   For I feel my heart-strings fail.

'Oh would I had kept that great great oath
   I swore by the horse's head,
I would never set foot on Roman ground
   Till the day that I lay dead.

'Oh would I were home in Caucaland,
   To hear my harpers play,
And to drink my last of the nut-brown ale,
   While I gave the gold rings away.

'Oh would I were home in Caucaland,
   To hear the Gothmen's horn,
And watch the waggons, and brown brood mares
   And the tents where I was born.

'But now I must die between four stone walls
   In Byzant beside the sea:
And as thou shalt deal with my little Baltung,
   So God shall deal with thee.'

The Kaiser he purged himself with oaths,
   And he buried him royally,
And he set on his barrow an idol of gold,
   Where all Romans must bow the knee.

And now the Goths are the Kaiser's men,
   And guard him with lance and sword,
And the little Baltung is his sworn son-at-arms,
   And eats at the Kaiser's board,

And the Kaiser's two sons are two false white lads
   That a clerk may beat with cane.
The clerk that should beat that little Baltung
   Would never sing mass again.

Oh the gates of Rome they are steel without,
   And beaten gold within:
But they shall fly wide to the little Baltung
   With the down upon his chin.

Oh the fairest flower in the Kaiser's garden
   Is Rome and Italian land:
But it all shall fall to the little Baltung
   When he shall take lance in hand.

And when he is parting the plunder of Rome,
   He shall pay for this song of mine,
Neither maiden nor land, neither jewel nor gold,
   But one cup of Italian wine.

Eversley, 1864.



ON THE DEATH OF LEOPOLD, KING OF THE BELGIANS {319}



A King is dead!  Another master mind
   Is summoned from the world-wide council hall.
Ah, for some seer, to say what links behind--
   To read the mystic writing on the wall!

Be still, fond man:  nor ask thy fate to know.
   Face bravely what each God-sent moment brings.
Above thee rules in love, through weal and woe,
   Guiding thy kings and thee, the King of kings.

Windsor Castle,
   November 10, 1865.



EASTER WEEK



(Written for music to be sung at a parish industrial exhibition)

See the land, her Easter keeping,
   Rises as her Maker rose.
Seeds, so long in darkness sleeping,
   Burst at last from winter snows.
Earth with heaven above rejoices;
   Fields and gardens hail the spring;
Shaughs and woodlands ring with voices,
   While the wild birds build and sing.

You, to whom your Maker granted
   Powers to those sweet birds unknown,
Use the craft by God implanted;
   Use the reason not your own.
Here, while heaven and earth rejoices,
   Each his Easter tribute bring--
Work of fingers, chant of voices,
   Like the birds who build and sing.

Eversley, 1867.



DRIFTING AWAY:  A FRAGMENT



They drift away.  Ah, God! they drift for ever.
I watch the stream sweep onward to the sea,
Like some old battered buoy upon a roaring river,
Round whom the tide-waifs hang--then drift to sea.

I watch them drift--the old familiar faces,
Who fished and rode with me, by stream and wold,
Till ghosts, not men, fill old beloved places,
And, ah! the land is rank with churchyard mold.

I watch them drift--the youthful aspirations,
Shores, landmarks, beacons, drift alike.
. . . . .
I watch them drift--the poets and the statesmen;
The very streams run upward from the sea.
   . . . . . .
   Yet overhead the boundless arch of heaven
   Still fades to night, still blazes into day.
   . . . . .
   Ah, God!  My God!  Thou wilt not drift away

November 1867.



CHRISTMAS DAY



How will it dawn, the coming Christmas Day?
A northern Christmas, such as painters love,
And kinsfolk, shaking hands but once a year,
And dames who tell old legends by the fire?
Red sun, blue sky, white snow, and pearled ice,
Keen ringing air, which sets the blood on fire,
And makes the old man merry with the young,
Through the short sunshine, through the longer night?
   Or southern Christmas, dark and dank with mist,
And heavy with the scent of steaming leaves,
And rosebuds mouldering on the dripping porch;
One twilight, without rise or set of sun,
Till beetles drone along the hollow lane,
And round the leafless hawthorns, flitting bats
Hawk the pale moths of winter?  Welcome then
At best, the flying gleam, the flying shower,
The rain-pools glittering on the long white roads,
And shadows sweeping on from down to down
Before the salt Atlantic gale:  yet come
In whatsoever garb, or gay, or sad,
Come fair, come foul, 'twill still be Christmas Day.
   How will it dawn, the coming Christmas Day?
To sailors lounging on the lonely deck
Beneath the rushing trade-wind?  Or to him,
Who by some noisome harbour of the East,
Watches swart arms roll down the precious bales,
Spoils of the tropic forests; year by year
Amid the din of heathen voices, groaning
Himself half heathen?  How to those--brave hearts!
Who toil with laden loins and sinking stride
Beside the bitter wells of treeless sands
Toward the peaks which flood the ancient Nile,
To free a tyrant's captives?  How to those--
New patriarchs of the new-found underworld--
Who stand, like Jacob, on the virgin lawns,
And count their flocks' increase?  To them that day
Shall dawn in glory, and solstitial blaze
Of full midsummer sun:  to them that morn,
Gay flowers beneath their feet, gay birds aloft,
Shall tell of nought but summer:  but to them,
Ere yet, unwarned by carol or by chime,
They spring into the saddle, thrills may come
From that great heart of Christendom which beats
Round all the worlds; and gracious thoughts of youth;
Of steadfast folk, who worship God at home;
Of wise words, learnt beside their mothers' knee;
Of innocent faces upturned once again
In awe and joy to listen to the tale
Of God made man, and in a manger laid--
May soften, purify, and raise the soul
From selfish cares, and growing lust of gain,
And phantoms of this dream which some call life,
Toward the eternal facts; for here or there,
Summer or winter, 'twill be Christmas Day.

   Blest day, which aye reminds us, year by year,
What 'tis to be a man:  to curb and spurn
The tyrant in us; that ignobler self
Which boasts, not loathes, its likeness to the brute,
And owns no good save ease, no ill save pain,
No purpose, save its share in that wild war
In which, through countless ages, living things
Compete in internecine greed.--Ah God!
Are we as creeping things, which have no Lord?
That we are brutes, great God, we know too well;
Apes daintier-featured; silly birds who flaunt
Their plumes unheeding of the fowler's step;
Spiders, who catch with paper, not with webs;
Tigers, who slay with cannon and sharp steel,
Instead of teeth and claws;--all these we are.
Are we no more than these, save in degree?
No more than these; and born but to compete--
To envy and devour, like beast or herb;
Mere fools of nature; puppets of strong lusts,
Taking the sword, to perish with the sword
Upon the universal battle-field,
Even as the things upon the moor outside?
   The heath eats up green grass and delicate flowers,
The pine eats up the heath, the grub the pine,
The finch the grub, the hawk the silly finch;
And man, the mightiest of all beasts of prey,
Eats what he lists; the strong eat up the weak,
The many eat the few; great nations, small;
And he who cometh in the name of all--
He, greediest, triumphs by the greed of all;
And, armed by his own victims, eats up all:
While ever out of the eternal heavens
Looks patient down the great magnanimous God,
Who, Maker of all worlds, did sacrifice
All to Himself?  Nay, but Himself to one;
Who taught mankind on that first Christmas Day,
What 'twas to be a man; to give, not take;
To serve, not rule; to nourish, not devour;
To help, not crush; if need, to die, not live.
   O blessed day, which givest the eternal lie
To self, and sense, and all the brute within;
Oh, come to us, amid this war of life;
To hall and hovel, come; to all who toil
In senate, shop, or study; and to those
Who, sundered by the wastes of half a world,
Ill-warned, and sorely tempted, ever face
Nature's brute powers, and men unmanned to brutes--
Come to them, blest and blessing, Christmas Day.
Tell them once more the tale of Bethlehem;
The kneeling shepherds, and the Babe Divine:
And keep them men indeed, fair Christmas Day.

Eversley, 1868.



SEPTEMBER 21, 1870  {325}



Speak low, speak little; who may sing
   While yonder cannon-thunders boom?
Watch, shuddering, what each day may bring:
   Nor 'pipe amid the crack of doom.'

And yet--the pines sing overhead,
   The robins by the alder-pool,
The bees about the garden-bed,
   The children dancing home from school.

And ever at the loom of Birth
   The mighty Mother weaves and sings:
She weaves--fresh robes for mangled earth;
   She sings--fresh hopes for desperate things.

And thou, too:  if through Nature's calm
   Some strain of music touch thine ears,
Accept and share that soothing balm,
   And sing, though choked with pitying tears.

Eversley, 1870.



THE MANGO-TREE



He wiled me through the furzy croft;
   He wiled me down the sandy lane.
He told his boy's love, soft and oft,
   Until I told him mine again.

We married, and we sailed the main;
   A soldier, and a soldier's wife.
We marched through many a burning plain;
   We sighed for many a gallant life.

But his--God kept it safe from harm.
   He toiled, and dared, and earned command;
And those three stripes upon his arm
   Were more to me than gold or land.

Sure he would win some great renown:
   Our lives were strong, our hearts were high.
One night the fever struck him down.
   I sat, and stared, and saw him die.

I had his children--one, two, three.
   One week I had them, blithe and sound.
The next--beneath this mango-tree,
   By him in barrack burying-ground.

I sit beneath the mango-shade;
   I live my five years' life all o'er--
Round yonder stems his children played;
   He mounted guard at yonder door.

'Tis I, not they, am gone and dead.
   They live; they know; they feel; they see.
Their spirits light the golden shade
   Beneath the giant mango-tree.

All things, save I, are full of life:
   The minas, pluming velvet breasts;
The monkeys, in their foolish strife;
   The swooping hawks, the swinging nests;

The lizards basking on the soil,
   The butterflies who sun their wings;
The bees about their household toil,
   They live, they love, the blissful things.

Each tender purple mango-shoot,
   That folds and droops so bashful down;
It lives; it sucks some hidden root;
   It rears at last a broad green crown.

It blossoms; and the children cry--
   'Watch when the mango-apples fall.'
It lives:  but rootless, fruitless, I--
   I breathe and dream;--and that is all.

Thus am I dead:  yet cannot die:
   But still within my foolish brain
There hangs a pale blue evening sky;
   A furzy croft; a sandy lane.

1870.



THE PRIEST'S HEART



It was Sir John, the fair young Priest,
   He strode up off the strand;
But seven fisher maidens he left behind
   All dancing hand in hand.

He came unto the wise wife's house:
   'Now, Mother, to prove your art;
To charm May Carleton's merry blue eyes
   Out of a young man's heart.'

'My son, you went for a holy man,
   Whose heart was set on high;
Go sing in your psalter, and read in your books;
   Man's love fleets lightly by.'

'I had liever to talk with May Carleton,
   Than with all the saints in Heaven;
I had liever to sit by May Carleton
   Than climb the spheres seven.

'I have watched and fasted, early and late,
   I have prayed to all above;
But I find no cure save churchyard mould
   For the pain which men call love.'

'Now Heaven forefend that ill grow worse:
   Enough that ill be ill.
I know of a spell to draw May Carleton,
   And bend her to your will.'

'If thou didst that which thou canst not do,
   Wise woman though thou be,
I would run and run till I buried myself
   In the surge of yonder sea.

'Scathless for me are maid and wife,
   And scathless shall they bide.
Yet charm me May Carleton's eyes from the heart
   That aches in my left side.'

She charmed him with the white witchcraft,
   She charmed him with the black,
But he turned his fair young face to the wall,
   Till she heard his heart-strings crack.

1870



'QU'EST QU'IL DIT' {330}



Espion aile de la jeune amante
De l'ombre des palmiers pourquoi ce cri?
Laisse en paix le beau garcon plaider et vaincre--
Pourquoi, pourquoi demander 'Qu'est qu'il dit?'

'Qu'est qu'il dit?'  Ce que tu dis toi-meme
Chaque mois de ce printemps eternel;
Ce que disent les papillons qui s'entre-baisent,
Ce que dit tout bel jeun etre a toute belle.

Importun!  Attende quelques lustres:
Quand les souvenirs 1'emmeneront ici--
Mere, grand'mere, pale, lasse, et fidele,
Demande mais doucement--'Et le vieillard,
   Qu'est qu'il dit?'

Trinidad, January 10, 1870



THE LEGEND OF LA BREA {331a}



Down beside the loathly Pitch Lake,
   In the stately Morichal, {331b}
Sat an ancient Spanish Indian,
   Peering through the columns tall.

Watching vainly for the flashing
   Of the jewelled colibris; {331c}
Listening vainly for their humming
   Round the honey-blossomed trees.

'Few,' he sighed, 'they come, and fewer,
   To the cocorite {331d} bowers;
Murdered, madly, through the forests
   Which of yore were theirs--and ours

By there came a negro hunter,
   Lithe and lusty, sleek and strong,
Rolling round his sparkling eyeballs,
   As he loped and lounged along.

Rusty firelock on his shoulder;
   Rusty cutlass on his thigh;
Never jollier British subject
   Rollicked underneath the sky.

British law to give him safety,
   British fleets to guard his shore,
And a square of British freehold--
   He had all we have, and more.

Fattening through the endless summer,
   Like his own provision ground,
He had reached the summum bonum
   Which our latest wits have found.

So he thought; and in his hammock
   Gnawed his junk of sugar-cane,
Toasted plantains at the fire-stick,
   Gnawed, and dozed, and gnawed again.

Had a wife in his ajoupa {332}--
   Or, at least, what did instead;
Children, too, who died so early,
   He'd no need to earn their bread.

Never stole, save what he needed,
   From the Crown woods round about;
Never lied, except when summoned--
   Let the warden find him out.

Never drank, except at market;
   Never beat his sturdy mate;
She could hit as hard as he could,
   And had just as hard a pate.

Had no care for priest nor parson,
   Hope of heaven nor fear of hell;
And in all his views of nature
   Held with Comte and Peter Bell.

Healthy, happy, silly, kindly,
   Neither care nor toil had he,
Save to work an hour at sunrise,
   And then hunt the colibri.

Not a bad man; not a good man:
   Scarce a man at all, one fears,
If the Man be that within us
   Which is born of fire and tears.

Round the palm-stems, round the creepers,
   Flashed a feathered jewel past,
Ruby-crested, topaz-throated,
   Plucked the cocorite bast,

Plucked the fallen ceiba-cotton, {333}
   Whirred away to build his nest,
Hung at last, with happy humming,
   Round some flower he fancied best.

Up then went the rusty muzzle,
   'Dat de tenth I shot to-day:'
But out sprang the Indian shouting,
   Balked the negro of his prey.

'Eh, you Senor Trinidada!
   What dis new ondacent plan?
Spoil a genl'man's chance ob shooting?
   I as good as any man.

'Dese not your woods; dese de Queen's woods:
   You seem not know whar you ar,
Gibbin' yuself dese buckra airs here,
   You black Indian Papist!  Dar!'

Stately, courteous, stood the Indian;
   Pointed through the palm-tree shade:
'Does the gentleman of colour
   Know how yon Pitch Lake was made?'

Grinned the negro, grinned and trembled--
   Through his nerves a shudder ran--
Saw a snake-like eye that held him;
   Saw--he'd met an Obeah man.

Saw a fetish--such a bottle--
   Buried at his cottage door;
Toad and spider, dirty water,
   Rusty nails, and nine charms more.

Saw in vision such a cock's head
   In the path--and it was white!
Saw Brinvilliers {334} in his pottage:
   Faltered, cold and damp with fright.

Fearful is the chance of poison:
   Fearful, too, the great unknown:
Magic brings some positivists
   Humbly on their marrow-bone.

Like the wedding-guest enchanted,
   There he stood, a trembling cur;
While the Indian told his story,
   Like the Ancient Mariner.

Told how--'Once that loathly Pitch Lake
   Was a garden bright and fair;
How the Chaymas off the mainland
   Built their palm ajoupas there.

'How they throve, and how they fattened,
   Hale and happy, safe and strong;
Passed the livelong days in feasting;
   Passed the nights in dance and song.

'Till they cruel grew, and wanton:
   Till they killed the colibris.
Then outspake the great Good Spirit,
   Who can see through all the trees,

'Said--"And what have I not sent you,
   Wanton Chaymas, many a year?
Lapp, {335a} agouti, {335b} cachicame, {335c}
   Quenc {335d} and guazu-pita deer.

'"Fish I sent you, sent you turtle,
   Chip-chip, {335e} conch, flamingo red,
Woodland paui, {335f} horned screamer, {335g}
   And blue ramier {335h} overhead.

'"Plums from balata {335i} and mombin, {335j}
   Tania, {335k} manioc, {335l} water-vine; {335m}
Let you fell my slim manacques, {335n}
   Tap my sweet moriche wine. {335o}

'"Sent rich plantains, {336a} food of angels;
   Rich ananas, {336b} food of kings;
Grudged you none of all my treasures:
   Save these lovely useless things."

'But the Chaymas' ears were deafened;
   Blind their eyes, and could not see
How a blissful Indian's spirit
   Lived in every colibri.

'Lived, forgetting toil and sorrow,
   Ever fair and ever new;
Whirring round the dear old woodland,
   Feeding on the honey-dew.

'Till one evening roared the earthquake:
   Monkeys howled, and parrots screamed:
And the Guaraons at morning
   Gathered here, as men who dreamed.

'Sunk were gardens, sunk ajoupas;
   Hut and hammock, man and hound:
And above the Chayma village
   Boiled with pitch the cursed ground.

'Full, and too full; safe, and too safe;
   Negro man, take care, take care.
He that wantons with God's bounties
   Of God's wrath had best beware.

'For the saucy, reckless, heartless,
   Evil days are sure in store.
You may see the Negro sinking
   As the Chayma sank of yore.'

Loudly laughed that stalwart hunter--
   'Eh, what superstitious talk!
Nyam {337} am nyam, an' maney maney;
   Birds am birds, like park am park;
An' dere's twenty thousand birdskins
   Ardered jes' now fram New Yark.'

Eversley, 1870.



HYMN {338}



Accept this building, gracious Lord,
   No temple though it be;
We raised it for our suffering kin,
   And so, Good Lord, for Thee.

Accept our little gift, and give
   To all who here may dwell,
The will and power to do their work,
   Or bear their sorrows well.

From Thee all skill and science flow;
   All pity, care, and love,
All calm and courage, faith and hope,
   Oh! pour them from above.

And part them, Lord, to each and all,
   As each and all shall need,
To rise like incense, each to Thee,
   In noble thought and deed.

And hasten, Lord, that perfect day,
   When pain and death shall cease;
And Thy just rule shall fill the earth
   With health, and light, and peace.

When ever blue the sky shall gleam,
   And ever green the sod;
And man's rude work deface no more
   The Paradise of God.

Eversley, 1870.



THE DELECTABLE DAY



The boy on the famous gray pony,
   Just bidding good-bye at the door,
Plucking up maiden heart for the fences
   Where his brother won honour of yore.

The walk to 'the Meet' with fair children,
   And women as gentle as gay,--
Ah! how do we male hogs in armour
   Deserve such companions as they?

The afternoon's wander to windward,
   To meet the dear boy coming back;
And to catch, down the turns of the valley,
   The last weary chime of the pack.

The climb homeward by park and by moorland,
   And through the fir forests again,
While the south-west wind roars in the gloaming,
   Like an ocean of seething champagne.

And at night the septette of Beethoven,
   And the grandmother by in her chair,
And the foot of all feet on the sofa
   Beating delicate time to the air.

Ah, God! a poor soul can but thank Thee
   For such a delectable day!
Though the fury, the fool, and the swindler,
   To-morrow again have their way!

Eversley, 6th November 1872.



JUVENTUS MUNDI



List a tale a fairy sent us
Fresh from dear Mundi Juventus.
When Love and all the world was young,
And birds conversed as well as sung;
And men still faced this fair creation
With humour, heart, imagination.
Who come hither from Morocco
Every spring on the sirocco?
In russet she, and he in yellow,
Singing ever clear and mellow,
'Sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet you, sweet you,
Did he beat you?  Did he beat you?'
Phyllopneustes wise folk call them,
But don't know what did befall them,
Why they ever thought of coming
All that way to hear gnats humming,
Why they built not nests but houses,
Like the bumble-bees and mousies.
Nor how little birds got wings,
Nor what 'tis the small cock sings--
How should they know--stupid fogies?
They daren't even believe in bogies.
Once they were a girl and boy,
Each the other's life and joy.
He a Daphnis, she a Chloe,
Only they were brown, not snowy,
Till an Arab found them playing
Far beyond the Atlas straying,
Tied the helpless things together,
Drove them in the burning weather,
In his slave-gang many a league,
Till they dropped from wild fatigue.
Up he caught his whip of hide,
Lashed each soft brown back and side
Till their little brains were burst
With sharp pain, and heat, and thirst,
Over her the poor boy lay,
Tried to keep the blows away,
Till they stiffened into clay,
And the ruffian rode away:
Swooping o'er the tainted ground,
Carrion vultures gathered round,
And the gaunt hyenas ran
Tracking up the caravan.
But--ah, wonder! that was gone
Which they meant to feast upon.
And, for each, a yellow wren,
One a cock, and one a hen,
Sweetly warbling, flitted forth
O'er the desert toward the north.
But a shade of bygone sorrow,
Like a dream upon the morrow,
Round his tiny brainlet clinging,
Sets the wee cock ever singing,
'Sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet you, sweet you,
Did he beat you?  Did he beat you?'
Vultures croaked, and hopped, and flopped,
But their evening meal was stopped.
And the gaunt hyenas foul
Sat down on their tails to howl.
Northward towards the cool spring weather,
Those two wrens fled on together,
On to England o'er the sea,
Where all folks alike are free.
There they built a cabin, wattled
Like the huts where first they prattled,
Hatched and fed, as safe as may be,
Many a tiny feathered baby.
But in autumn south they go
Past the Straits and Atlas' snow,
Over desert, over mountain,
To the palms beside the fountain,
Where, when once they lived before, he
Told her first the old, old story.
'What do the doves say?  Curuck Coo,
You love me and I love you.'

1872.



VALENTINE'S DAY



Oh!  I wish I were a tiny browny bird from out the south,
   Settled among the alder-holts, and twittering by the stream;
I would put my tiny tail down, and put up my tiny mouth,
   And sing my tiny life away in one melodious dream.

I would sing about the blossoms, and the sunshine and the sky,
   And the tiny wife I mean to have in such a cosy nest;
And if some one came and shot me dead, why then I could but die,
   With my tiny life and tiny song just ended at their best.

Eversley, 1873



BALLAD:  LORRAINE, LORRAINE, LORREE



1

'Are you ready for your steeple-chase, Lorraine, Lorraine, Lorree?
   Barum, Barum, Barum, Barum, Barum, Barum, Baree,
You're booked to ride your capping race to-day at Coulterlee,
You're booked to ride Vindictive, for all the world to see,
To keep him straight, to keep him first, and win the run for me.
   Barum, Barum,' etc.

2

She clasped her new-born baby, poor Lorraine, Lorraine, Lorree,
'I cannot ride Vindictive, as any man might see,
And I will not ride Vindictive, with this baby on my knee;
He's killed a boy, he's killed a man, and why must he kill me?'

3

'Unless you ride Vindictive, Lorraine, Lorraine, Lorree,
Unless you ride Vindictive to-day at Coulterlee,
And land him safe across the brook, and win the blank for me,
It's you may keep your baby, for you'll get no keep from me.'

4

'That husbands could be cruel,' said Lorraine, Lorraine, Lorree,
'That husbands could be cruel, I have known for seasons three;
But oh! to ride Vindictive while a baby cries for me,
And be killed across a fence at last for all the world to see!'

5

She mastered young Vindictive--Oh! the gallant lass was she,
And kept him straight and won the race as near as near could be;
But he killed her at the brook against a pollard willow-tree,
Oh! he killed her at the brook, the brute, for all the world to see,
And no one but the baby cried for poor Lorraine, Lorree.

Last poem written in illness.
Colorado, U.S.A.
June 1874.



MARTIN LIGHTFOOT'S SONG {346}



Come hearken, hearken, gentles all,
   Come hearken unto me,
And I'll sing you a song of a Wood-Lyon
   Came swimming out over the sea.

He ranged west, he ranged east,
   And far and wide ranged he;
He took his bite out of every beast
   Lives under the greenwood tree.

Then by there came a silly old wolf,
   'And I'll serve you,' quoth he;
Quoth the Lyon, 'My paw is heavy enough,
   So what wilt thou do for me?'

Then by there came a cunning old fox,
   'And I'll serve you,' quoth he;
Quoth the Lyon, 'My wits are sharp enough
   So what wilt thou do for me?'

Then by there came a white, white dove,
   Flew off Our Lady's knee;
Sang 'It's I will be your true, true love,
   If you'll be true to me.'

'And what will you do, you bonny white dove?
   And what will you do for me?'
'Oh, it's I'll bring you to Our Lady's love,
   In the ways of chivalrie.'

He followed the dove that Wood-Lyon
   By mere and wood and wold,
Till he is come to a perfect knight,
   Like the Paladin of old.

He ranged east, he ranged west,
   And far and wide ranged he--
And ever the dove won him honour and fame
   In the ways of chivalrie.

Then by there came a foul old sow,
   Came rookling under the tree;
And 'It's I will be true love to you,
   If you'll be true to me.'

'And what wilt thou do, thou foul old sow?
   And what wilt thou do for me?'
'Oh, there hangs in my snout a jewel of gold,
   And that will I give to thee.'

He took to the sow that Wood-Lyon;
   To the rookling sow took he;
And the dove flew up to Our Lady's bosom;
   And never again throve he.



Footnotes:

{211}  This and the following poem were written at school in early boy-hood.

{216}  Lines supposed to be found written in an illuminated missal.

{260}  Found among Sandy Mackaye's papers, of a hairy oubit who would not
mind his mother.

{282}  The Christian Socialist, started by the Council of Associates for
promotion of Co-operation.

{295}  Bishop of Labuan, in Borneo.

{303}  This Ode was set to Professor Sterndale Bennet's music, and sung in
the Senate House, Cambridge, on the Day of Installation.

{306}  His Royal Highness the Prince Consort, Chancellor of Cambridge
University.

{319}  Impromptu lines written in the album of the Crown Princess of Germany.

{325}  Time of the Franco-Prussian War.

{330}  The Qu'est qu'il dit is a Tropical bird.

{331a}  This myth about the famous Pitch Lake of Trinidad was told almost
word for word to a M. Joseph by an aged half-caste Indian who went by the
name of Senor Trinidada.  The manners and customs which the ballad described,
and the cruel and dangerous destruction of the beautiful birds of Trinidad,
are facts which may be easily verified by any one who will take the trouble
to visit the West Indies.

{331b}  A magnificent wood of the Mauritia Fanpalm, on the south shore of the
Pitch Lake.

{331c}  Humming-birds.

{331d}  Maximiliana palms.

{332}  Hut of timber and palm-leaves.

{333}  From the Eriodendron, or giant silk-cotton.

{334}  Spigelia anthelmia, a too-well-known poison-plant.

{335a}  Coelogenys Paca.

{335b}  Wild cavy.

{335c}  Armadillo.

{335d}  Peccary hog.

{335e}  Trigonia.

{335f}  Penelope.

{335g}  Palamedea.

{335h}  Dove.

{335i}  Mimusops.

{335j}  Spondias.

{335k}  An esculent Arum.

{335l}  Jatropha manihot, 'Cassava.'

{335m}  Vitis Caribaea.

{335n}  Euterpe, 'mountain cabbage' palm.

{335o}  Mauritia palm.

{336a}  Musa.

{336b}  Pine-apple.

{337}  Food.

{338}  Sung by 1000 School Children at the Opening of the New Wing of the
Children's Hospital, Birmingham.

{346}  Supposed to be sung at Crowland Minster to Leofric, the Wake's Mass
Priest, when news was received of Hereward's second marriage to Alftruda.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDROMEDA AND OTHER POEMS***


******* This file should be named 11064.txt or 11064.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/0/6/11064


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
i nsirdeoaI±
nio.rg's The Blue Birds' Winter Nest, by Lillian Elizabeth Roy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Blue Birds' Winter Nest

Author: Lillian Elizabeth Roy

Release Date: December 3, 2007 [EBook #23693]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE BIRDS' WINTER NEST ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: The Blue Birds and Bobolinks were deep in the work of
constructing a magazine. (Page 259) ("The Blue Birds' Winter Nest.")]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BLUE BIRDS' WINTER NEST

By
LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

Author Of
"The Blue Birds of Happy Times Nest," "The Blue Birds' Uncle Ben,"
"The Blue Birds at Happy Hills," "The Five Little Starrs Series,"
"The Girl Scouts' Country Life Series," etc.

A. L. BURT COMPANY
Publishers--New York

Printed in U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright, 1916, by
THE PLATT & PECK COMPANY

Printed in U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 CONTENTS

   CHAPTER                                                          PAGE

         I. How Aunt Selina Flew                                       7
        II. A Sunday Walk and Its Results                             26
       III. The Blue Birds' Inspiration                               45
        IV. The Bobolink Boys Founded                                 62
         V. Uncle Ben's Business Talk                                 81
        VI. Beginning the Winter Work                                 96
       VII. Blue Bird Wisdom and Bobolink Work                       114
      VIII. Aunt Selina's Civil War Story                            135
        IX. How the Yankees Took Possession                          160
         X. Beginning To Spell Success                               179
        XI. The Winter Nest Council                                  199
       XII. The Story of an Alaskan Trip                             219
      XIII. A Winter in the Frozen North                             238
       XIV. The B. B. & B. B. Magazine                               259
        XV. How the Magazine Went Out                                285

------------------------------------------------------------------------




THE BLUE BIRDS' WINTER NEST

CHAPTER I

HOW AUNT SELINA FLEW


"Sally! I say, Sally! Come here!" cried a peevish voice, belonging to a
querulous old lady who was huddled up on a couch in the bright morning
room of her fine old mansion.

"I'se here, Miss S'lina--comin' straight an' fas' as mah laigs kin
brings me!" replied a cheerful colored woman, bustling around, and
moving some toast so it would not scorch.

"Are you quite sure you told Abe to meet the eleven-thirty train at
Greenfields station? Just fancy how dreadful it would be to have Miss
Ruth get off the train and not find anyone there to meet her!"
complained Miss Selina, her face twitching with pain as she raised her
hands to emphasize her remark.

"Laws'ee, Miss S'lina! Don' you be 'fraid dat I han't tended to
eberyt'ing for little Miss Rufie's welcome! Leave it to ole Sally, what
likes dat chile like her own kin!"

"Well, then, Sally, hurry with my toast and tea--and for goodness' sake,
don't you bring scorched toast again! There, I can smell it burning this
very minute! How many times must I tell you that I will not trust those
electric toasters? The old-fashioned coal fire is good enough for
me--and it would be for you, too, if it were not for your ridiculous
ideas of being progressive and having all these electric fol-de-rols put
up in the house. My house, too! Think of it! A servant to order these
contraptions and use them in my very own home and make me pay for them,
when I prefer the ways of my forefathers." Then utterly wearied with her
long complaint, Miss Selina collapsed, and closed her eyes.

Sally, the old family servant who had lived all her days with the
Talmage family at Happy Hills, had been a playmate of Miss Selina's; in
fact, she had grown up with all the children of the "big house." She
smiled indulgently at her mistress' words, as she bent over a fresh
piece of toast.

"Pore chile--Sally knows a heap of time is saved 'twixt 'lectricity an'
coal, an' she's goin' to cleave to the bestes' way ever foun' yit--an'
she knows what dem old rheumaticks is a-doin' to your temper,"
soliloquized the astute servant.

The toast was nicely browned, and the tea brewed perfectly, and Sally
placed them on a dainty tray which she carried over to the couch.

"Want I should leave you alone, or he'p you break the bread?" asked
Sally, soothingly.

Miss Selina opened her eyes and answered, "If I were sure you had Miss
Ruth's room all ready, and everything else as it should be, I would let
you pour that tea for me; but I suppose you have neglected half your
work to be in here with me."

Sally's broad grin wrinkled the corners of her mouth, as she took the
teapot and poured the fragrant beverage into a Japanese cup. At the same
time her mind seemed to dwell upon a pleasant subject.

"Does you 'member, Miss S'lina, de las' time little Rufie visited us?
Dat's de time she was all full of a plan for havin' some kin' of a
bird's nest at home. I wonder ef she ever did fix it up?"

Miss Selina forgot to find fault for a few moments, as Sally's words
caused her to remember the plan her grand-niece had talked over.

"Seems to me, her mother wrote something in a letter about a Blue Bird
Nest they were going to start. But I haven't the slightest idea what it
is. I should think they would build nests for robins and birds who are
plentiful in our country places. Blue Birds are not very numerous in our
woods."

"T'wan't for real birds--don' you recomember? It was jus' de name dey
was goin' to use fer a li'l 'sociation like!" corrected Sally, as she
held the plate of toast within reach of the invalid's hand.

"No, I don't remember! How should I?--with all this pain forever tying
me into knots!" mumbled Miss Selina, as a toothsome morsel of toast
entered her mouth.

Suddenly, the crunching of wheels on the gravel drive was heard, and
Sally craned her neck to look from the window.

"There goes Abe now," she said.

The same day the Blue Birds of Happy Times Nest, at Oakdale, had become
"Fliers," little Ruth Talmage, the favorite of the Nest, had received an
invitation to spend a week at her Aunt Selina's house, and Abe was now
on his way to the station to meet her.

Aunt Selina was an unpleasant old lady, and few of her relatives cared
to visit her; so, when she had her attacks of rheumatism she generally
had to spend her time on the couch with no one to amuse her. She had
invited Ruth the previous Spring, and had enjoyed the little girl's
visit so much, that she had sent for her now when helpless with another
attack.

Of course, when the telegram came to Ruth's home, asking the little girl
to visit Aunt Selina, the Blue Birds felt sorry for her, knowing what a
miserable time Ruth would have. Then, too, Ruth's father was expected
home that Saturday, and Ruth had not seen him for almost a year.

Ruth, however, was willing to sacrifice her own pleasure to help Aunt
Selina--as every Blue Bird tries to follow the Golden Rule--so she left
her playmates Saturday morning, with promises to write every day until
she returned, and they, in turn, earnestly promised to explain to her
father just why she went away the day he was expected home.

Now, Happy Hills, Aunt Selina's home, was several miles from Greenfields
Station, and the country about this section of Pennsylvania was so
beautiful and healthful that city people gradually settled upon estates
and spent their summers there. Beautiful carriages and automobiles daily
passed over the fine old road that divided Happy Hills in half. But no
one had much of an opportunity to admire the place as high board fences
had been built on either side of the road as far as the property fronted
it.

Happy Hills was an old family estate comprising more than two thousand
acres, half woodland and half cultivated fields and green pastures. A
spring of clear water, hidden among the rocks of the highest hill at the
back of the farm, furnished plenty of water for the noisy brook that
tumbled from rock to rock on the hillside, and, after splashing in and
out among the trees, ran like a broad ribbon through the green meadows.

The entire property was enclosed with a high fence, even the woodland
being carefully hemmed in so no little children could get in to play in
the brook, or pick wild berries and flowers that decayed in profusion
year after year.

Sally was a trusted old housekeeper who had her mistress' confidence;
Abe was her husband who had driven the Talmage coupe ever since he came
North at the time of the Civil War.

Miss Selina had not always been so disagreeable. She had old-fashioned
pictures of herself at the age of eighteen when hoop-skirts were the
fashion, and the young women wore their hair in "water-falls." At that
time a handsome young man was in love with her, but he was shot in the
war, and she brooded over her loss so long that she lost all the
sweetness of living. The older she grew the more disagreeable she
became, until, not one of her relatives wanted to be with her, but
managed to keep far from her complaining voice.

And for this old lady, Ruth had waived the anticipated home coming of
her dear father!

Breakfast over, Sally propped Miss Selina up on the cushions and left
her for a time.

After wondering how long it would take Abe to drive back from the
eleven-thirty train, Miss Selina started to think of something she had
been pondering the last few days. What should she do with her vast
estate if she died? She had never made a will, for she abhorred the idea
of dying and having any strangers in her home. But she couldn't take it
with her, and she was nearing seventy years of age with all the signs of
old age breaking over her defenceless head.

She tried to think of someone to whom she really wanted to leave her
home, but there was no one. She generally sighed at this point and
dropped the unpleasant thought. To-day, however, she wondered if her
nephew and his wife could be plotting to get her property by having Ruth
visit whenever she was invited. This idea seemed to take hold of her,
and she frowned as she made up her mind to ask Ruth questions about her
mother's intentions and opinions regarding Aunt Selina and Happy Hills.

Miss Selina had been so engrossed in her thoughts that the sound of
carriage wheels on the drive failed to reach her. Therefore, it was with
a start of surprise that she heard the door flung open and a happy
child's voice cry:

"Aunt Selina! I'm here! Are you glad to have me?" while a pair of soft
little arms were gently placed about her withered old neck and fresh
little lips pressed her cheek.

The caress was such an unusual experience that Miss Selina forgot to
wince or complain, and before she did remember, Ruth was bubbling over
with news.

"What do you think is to happen to-day?--Oh! Aunt Selina, we all have
new names at home; even mother is now called Mother Wings and I am
Fluff. The other Blue Birds have names they chose for themselves, and
Ned is an Owl, and prints our weekly paper called the _Chirp_. Now,
instead of Aunt Selina, I want to call you a bird-name, too. May I?"

Aunt Selina smiled sympathetically at Ruth's words, but, recalled to her
condition by a twinge of pain, she moaned, "Child, poor old Aunt Selina
would make a wretched specimen of a bird nowadays. The only kind I feel
that I could represent truly is a raven--for it always croaks."

Ruth laughed consolingly, but cried, "Oh, Aunt Selina, that is just
because you feel blue with those old rheumatics. Mother says we always
look at life through dark spectacles when we're in pain, and we b'lieve
the lovely world has lost all its brightness. Now, I've come to make you
forget your blues and I _must_ have a new name to say, because there is
so _much_ to tell you that I would lose time if I had to say 'Aunt
Selina' every time. Besides, a new name will make you forget yourself."

"What could you call me?" questioned her aunt, trying to fall in with
the child's whim.

"We'll have to think! It isn't as easy as it may sound to find a name to
suit. We had a dreadful hard time to do it."

"'Fluff' suits you beautifully. Who found it?" said the old lady
interestedly.

"I chose two, but we can only have one. One was 'Flutey' the other
'Fluff'; Ned and the Blue Birds liked 'Fluff' best, and they have called
me by that name ever since we were christened in the Nest."

"When I was a little girl like you I used to enjoy whistling about the
place so much that father called me his little flute. I can still see
the shocked expression of my aunt who visited us, when she heard me
running about whistling like a boy. She was a grand dame of society in
New York, and _her_ girls were doing embroidery and being taught how to
curtsey and behave in the drawing-room." And Miss Selina smiled at Ruth
who fully understood the remark and clapped her hands delightedly at her
aunt who had been a hoyden so long ago.

"I just love to whistle, too. Ned says I can pipe higher and carry a
tune better than anyone he knows!" declared Ruth, and aunt and
grand-niece felt a common bond of unity.

Ruth was about to demonstrate her accomplishment to Aunt Selina, when
her face puckered into a funny expression and her shoulders hunched up
about her ears as they usually did when some secret thought gave her a
surprise. She leaned over the couch and confidentially whispered, "Aunt
Selina, I'll tell you what! We both love to whistle, don't we? Then, you
shall be christened with my other name! You shall be 'Flutey,' eh?"

"Oh, dear child, it would be sarcasm to name me that now! Why, the only
claim I have to that name would be because of my fluted skin. Just look
at my neck and face!" said Aunt Selina.

"No such thing!" retorted Ruth. "I never saw any flutes on your face
until this very minute when you made me see some little wrinkles. Your
skin is soft and white, so don't you ever tell folks what you said to
me, 'cause they won't see anything but a nice face."

Of course, Aunt Selina felt elated to hear such comforting words, but
Ruth gave her no time to meditate.

"Do you like the name I, as your god-mother, give you?" laughed the
merry little girl.

"Yes, indeed, it is fine, but we must keep it a secret. Just fancy Sally
or Abe, or any of the servants, calling me 'Miss Flutey!'" And Aunt
Selina laughed aloud just as the door opened and Sally popped her head
through the aperture. Seeing the happy faces and hearing the unusual
laughter, she immediately closed the door, without having been seen or
heard. Out in the wide hall she lifted both arms high toward the ceiling
and rolled her eyes devoutly upward as she murmured, "Praise be to the
Lud, dat dat little tree is come wif healin' in its leaves." After this
strange remark, Sally hurried out to tell Abe of the miracle.

Aunt Selina, in spite of her age, felt a childish delight in having a
secret with Ruth, and after a few moments said, "I shall have to call
you Fluff, and you must call me Flutey, I suppose, if we are to belong
to the same Nest."

"Yes, that's the way," replied Ruth, clapping her hands softly. "Now,
let me tell you all the wonderful things we did this summer."

Then began a recital of how the Blue Birds of Happy Times Nest started;
about each member and her name; the nest in the old cherry-tree; how
they had earned money to bring some poor children from the city to spend
the hot weeks in the country; and, best of all, how they had interested
all of the citizens of Oakdale in helping a hundred poor city children
to spend a few weeks in the beautiful village of Oakdale.

At this moment a loud knock at the door caused Aunt Selina to sit up and
call out, "Come in!"

"Shall you hab lunch in de dinin' room, or serbed here?" said Sally.

"Lunch! Why, is it time--is it one o'clock?" gasped Miss Selina.

"Ya'as'm--pas dat hour, too," replied Sally, smiling broadly at Ruth,
who returned the good-natured feeling.

"Well, well; I feel much better, Sally," admitted Aunt Selina. "Nothing
like having young folks around when one feels blue, eh? I guess you'd
better bring the lunch tray here, and Miss Ruth and I will picnic this
noon."

In a few moments the waitress brought in a huge tray while Sally
followed with a folding table which she placed by the side of the couch.

A joysome hour passed in "picnicking" the lunch, then Sally rang for the
maid to remove the dishes. After she had gone, Sally turned to her
mistress and, with the familiarity of an old servant, said, "Miss Rufie
shore is de bestes tonic you ebber took. You'se et more lunch, Miss
Selina, dan I'se seen yo' et in six mont!"

Then whisking a few tiny crumbs from the couch afghan, Sally gathered up
the doilies and went out, smiling contentedly.

That afternoon worked a remarkable change in Aunt Selina. She forgot all
about herself and her misery while listening to her grand-niece's story
of sacrifice for others.

She listened attentively to every word, until Ruth concluded with the
words, "Now, we are planning some great work for our winter nest, but
we don't know just what we will choose."

So impressed was Aunt Selina with the movement started by the New York
Organization, that she determined to help the cause in every way she
could.

In the evening with the help of a cane and Sally, Aunt Selina managed to
reach the dining-room for dinner. "For," said she, "it is a shame to
keep Ruth cooped up in my morning room all day long."

During dinner she marveled at the improvement in her physical condition
and worried lest her ailments return suddenly. But Ruth reassured her.

"No, indeed, Flutey, we have so much to do and plan while I am here,
that you won't have time to think of getting sick again."

Aunt Selina looked dumbfounded for a moment.

"Ruth, do you suppose that's what ails me--nothing to do but think of
myself all of the time?" said she.

"Flutey, not only with you, but with lots of folks!" replied Ruth,
wisely. "You see, anyone who is busy and has something to do all the
time never gets sick, because they haven't time to worry 'bout
themselves if they feel a bit of pain. Why, this summer I saw lots of
beginnings of sickness stopped just because everyone had to get through
their work for the city children. Even me: when mother told me that
father--oh, oh--oh!" and Ruth doubled over her plate and giggled
immoderately.

"Now what ails you, child?" inquired Aunt Selina, smiling in sympathy
with her guest's merry laugh.

"Oh, Aunt Selina, this goes to prove what I just said! Here I have been
with you all day, so full of the story of our Nest and all we did, that
I forgot to feel sorry for myself. Why, think of it! Father is expected
home to-night, and I'm not there! When your telegram came asking me to
come here, and mother told me father was expected the same day, I felt
dreadfully bad about it, but mother said I might help the winter nest a
great deal by coming to show you how to fly, so I really made up my mind
not to feel sorry about not seeing father. And here I am all this time,
forgetting my disappointment about leaving home to-day, and now,
laughing over it. Don't you see?"

Aunt Selina nodded her head comprehendingly as she said, "Yes, I see!
Yes, I see what has been my undoing all these years. Child, you have
done something for me that all my years have failed in showing me. God
bless you, Ruth, for coming, and when I tell your father about it he
will be proud of his little Blue Bird that brought such peace to me."

As she concluded, Aunt Selina's eyes were brimful of tears, but they
were tears of gratitude, and such tears always wash away much of our
stubborn selfishness.

Sally hovered about the table to be on hand to assist her querulous
mistress if necessary and she, too, felt the effect of Ruth's words and
silently praised God for the blessing.

After Aunt Selina and Ruth were comfortably seated in the soft
easy-chairs of the former's bedroom, Ruth asked permission to write the
letters she had promised the Blue Birds at home. Aunt Selina nodded
cheerfully, and sat watching the little girl write until her eyelids
drowsed slowly over her eyes.

The first and most important letter was written to Ruth's dear father
and mother. The next to Ned, and the third to all of the Blue Birds of
Happy Times Nest. Here, she wrote as she pleased and told them about her
trip, how interested Aunt Selina seemed to be, about the secret name she
had given the new Blue Bird and all of the fine things Aunt Selina was
going to do just as soon as plans could be talked over. As the letter
drew to a close, Ruth begged her friends to write every day and not
undertake any important work until she came home.

The last letter took a long time to write and Aunt Selina was fully
awake before Ruth had finished.

"Laws, Child! Do you know the time? What would your mother say if she
knew I kept her daughter out of bed until after nine o'clock? If the
letters are finished you must go straight to your room." And Aunt Selina
rang for Sally.

That night as Ruth slept soundly, Aunt Selina lay thinking over all her
grand-niece had told her. As she thought of all her wasted years and of
all the wonderful good she might have done with her leisure time and
wealth, she turned her face to the wall and shed bitter tears of regret.

Then recalling Ruth's advice to fill her mind with something good and
helpful, the old lady vowed to pick up the frayed ends of her life and
ask Ruth how to use her money and time to create some lasting good for
others. As she smiled contentedly over the idea of her grand-niece of
tender years advising and helping her, an old lady of three score and
ten, the Bible text flashed into her mind--"And a little child shall
lead them."

Then Aunt Selina fell into a restful, health-giving sleep such as she
had not had in years.




CHAPTER II

A SUNDAY WALK AND ITS RESULTS


Ruth was out-of-doors early the following morning, enjoying the sweet,
crisp breeze with its odor of dew-laden meadows. After sniffing
delightedly for a few moments, she skipped up and down the long veranda,
calling to the birds and snapping her fingers at some curious squirrels.
Sally heard the joyous child and came out to bid her a good-morning.

"Sally, what a beautiful farm Aunt Selina has! It looks lovelier this
morning than ever, but it makes me sad when I think that no one can
enjoy it except the folks that live here," said Ruth, in a tone of
regret.

"Ya'as, Chile, I feels sorry dat Miss S'lina had dem high board fences
put up to keep anjoyin' eyes from de propaty. An' den agin, I kin s'cuse
de little chillern dat sneak fru de back fences jus' to pick wilets an'
paddle in de brok up dere;" and Sally looked toward the inviting
woodland, whence came the sound of running water.

"If Aunt Selina is to be a really truly Blue Bird she will remove
whatever keeps others from enjoying what she has," commented Ruth,
seriously.

A bell, tinkling from an upper room, summoned Sally hurriedly indoors,
so Ruth sat down in a large wicker rocker to await her aunt's coming.

Sally soon came and told Ruth breakfast was ready and there sat Miss
Selina welcoming her with a cheery smile!

"Do you feel as happy and free as a Blue Bird, Flutey?" asked Ruth,
giving Aunt Selina a hearty embrace.

Unaccustomed to such healthy demonstrations of affection, she suffered
her lace cap to be pulled over one ear while her other was uncomfortably
doubled under Ruth's plump little arm.

"Yes, Fluff, I feel unusually well this morning. I slept like a babe all
night," replied her aunt.

"That's the way all Blue Birds sleep. Not one of us would stay in bed a
minute just because something tried to make us feel too tired or sick to
get up early in the morning! You know, the Camp Fire Girls receive
honors for keeping free from illness, and some day the Blue Birds expect
to join the bigger girls in their Camp Fires. So we begin to practice
good health now," explained Ruth.

The breakfast passed quickly with not a sound or sigh from Aunt Selina
about rheumatism. Sally was the most astonished of all, for it had
become second nature with her mistress to talk about her pains and woes
at all times.

"While I was waiting on the piazza, this morning, I planned to take you
for a nice long walk," said Ruth.

"Why, my dear, I simply cannot walk out of doors. I could hardly hobble
about the house this morning."

"Oh, I s'pose you couldn't walk very well, but I can walk and you can
ride in the wheel-chair. I will push it, and we will go down the meadow
path toward the summer-house," said Ruth.

Aunt Selina looked dubiously at Sally, but the latter was very busy
placing some of the family silver in the chest, and her back was turned.

After a few moments' hesitation she said, "I never take that chair off
of the porch, and I am afraid you are too little to push it."

"Oh, no, indeed I'm not. It won't hurt the chair, and even if it did,
your pleasure just now is better than ten chairs!" decided Ruth.

After several weak attempts to turn Ruth from her purpose, Aunt Selina
surrendered with a sigh.

As Sally left the room just then she chuckled to herself, "Dat chile
will shorely 'juvenate Miss S'lina!"

After breakfast aunt and grand-niece went out on the veranda and Ruth
soon had the chair down the steps and waiting for her aunt.

Aunt Selina felt a bit conscious at being wheeled like a baby, but Ruth
was too merry to permit anything but joy to prevail.

Ruth turned the chair into a path that ran along the brook, and chatted
merrily until Aunt Selina forgot herself in listening. At the end of the
path stood a rustic summer-house from which could be seen the wide
expanse of meadow and woodland. Having reached this spot, Ruth placed
the chair so her aunt could look about and admire her beautiful lands.

"Flutey, don't you ever go to church on Sunday mornings?" asked Ruth.

"The only church is so far away that I would have to drive for half an
hour to reach it; then, too, it is not a denomination that I approve
of," she replied, coolly.

But a little thing like a cold reply or a curt tone never daunted Ruth
when she was after any particular information.

"What is the difference between one denomination and another? I don't
exactly know the meaning of that word, but I know it means something
about churches."

"Well, some churches believe in worshipping God one way and some in
another. These different beliefs are called 'denominations.' Now, all of
our family were brought up to believe the Baptist manner of worship to
be the only true one, and this church at Greenfields is Presbyterian. Of
course, everyone knows that pre-destination is all wrong," said Aunt
Selina emphatically.

Ruth's eyes opened wider and wider as she listened, for she had been
taught a very simple faith. She had been told that to live and follow
the "Golden Rule" was the highest form of obedience, and that it was
true worship. So she answered quietly:

"I love Jesus, and I believe he taught everyone the same way, and I
believe he just loved everybody the same way."

"We will not discuss religion, Ruth. Just keep on thinking and doing as
Mother has taught you."

"Well, I was only going to say, that as we cannot go to church such a
lovely morning, we might sit here and thank God for all these fields,"
explained Ruth.

Aunt Selina looked about the land in the light of a new revelation.

"I was thinking," continued Ruth, "how I should love to have this farm
near Oakdale. I could come over so often to tell you what we are doing,
and then, too, you could use all of that wonderful woodland for Blue
Birds' Camps in the summer."

Aunt Selina looked across the fields and woods but said nothing, so Ruth
continued.

"When the two Ferris children came out to Mrs. Mason's farm, they were
so happy to see real flowers and grass that they soon got well and
strong. That made me wish that I had hundreds of farms just like it
where sick children could go and get well. That was one thing that made
the Oakdale folks help get the hundred city poor children out to our
country for a few weeks in August and the lovely time the children had
made everyone wish to do bigger things this next summer. Nothing has
really been planned yet, but everyone is trying to think of some way to
do something. This morning when I saw this wonderful farm and so few
folks to live on it, I just wished it was near Oakdale so a big crowd of
poor children could enjoy it next summer."

As Ruth concluded and looked wistfully over the fertile land, her aunt
sat thinking for a time, then answered.

"Fluff, I determined to be a Blue Bird with all of my heart and soul.
Now, we can't move this farm over to Oakdale, but the city children can
be moved out to this farm! You can do the planning from Oakdale, and I
can look after them when they get here."

Ruth gasped in amazement at the splendid idea, then jumped up and down
with delight while she shouted aloud.

"Oh, oh! Flutey! that is great! Why, just think of all the streets full
of poor children who can enjoy these wonderful woods!"

Aunt Selina winced at the word "street children," but she spoke with
determination.

"I suppose we would have to build some sort of little houses, or
temporary camps for them to sleep in, and a long shed in which to serve
the meals. It will need a lot of planning."

"Dear me, I wish we could run and ask mother about it," murmured Ruth,
impatiently. "Now, if you were only visiting me instead of me being here
with _you_!"

"If I had gone to you, you might never have had the idea of using these
woods for the children," ventured her aunt.

"No, that's so," admitted Ruth. "And we can go back to the house and
write all our plans down on paper and send them to mother, can't we?"

Aunt Selina consenting, Ruth wheeled the chair back to the house. When
they reached the steps the invalid felt so strong that she lifted
herself out of the chair and climbed up the low steps with only Ruth to
lean upon.

"Why, I never felt a twinge in my joints all this time! I never knew
rheumatism to disappear so quickly as it has this time," she said, as
she sank down in a low chair.

"Let's hope it won't come back again," added Ruth. "If it stays away
you could pack up and go to Oakdale with me, couldn't you?"

Aunt Selina, who never visited and seldom left her home, looked
horrified for a moment. But Ruth continued innocently,

"We could get all of mother's advice for the farm plans besides seeing
father and being home with him!"

Sally, who had seen Miss Selina coming up the steps without a cane,
thought some miracle had been performed. So, wishing to hear all about
it, she hurried out with the announcement that dinner was almost ready.

"Dinner! Why, Sally, we just finished breakfast. I'm sure I don't want
anything to eat so soon," replied Miss Selina.

"It's pas' one o'clock, Miss S'lina, an' you allus likes de meals to be
on time," ventured Sally.

"I'm sure I feel as if it was dinner time, 'cause I'm so hungry," added
Ruth, who always had a healthy appetite.

Aunt Selina laughed indulgently as she rose and limped slowly indoors.

Immediately after dinner Ruth hurried to the library and brought forth
a pencil and paper. Meeting her aunt in the hall she said, "Now, we'll
sit down and put all of our plans on paper."

The greater part of the afternoon was passed in this engrossing work.

That night Aunt Selina again sought her bed with a great sense of
gratitude that she could enjoy the rest without any pain. She slept all
through the night and awoke in the morning feeling strong and energetic.
Almost every trace of her lameness had disappeared.

The mail lay upon a silver tray beside her plate, and she smiled as she
handed two letters to Ruth.

"May I read them, Flutey?" asked Ruth, as soon as she had peeped at the
post marks.

Aunt Selina nodded, and Ruth tore open the one from the Blue Birds
first, saying in an explanatory tone, "I like to leave the best for the
last."

The Blue Birds had written her because they promised to do so, but there
had not been time for anything of importance to happen, so Ruth laid
aside their short note and took up her mother's letter. The first
sentence made her gasp, and at the second, she giggled outright. Aunt
Selina waited patiently to hear the news.

"Just think, Flutey, I didn't miss father, anyway--and just see all we
have accomplished by my coming here to you! Mother writes that she had a
telegram from father late Saturday night, saying the steamer was
detained at quarantine on account of some suspects in the steerage who
seemed to have symptoms of yellow fever. He is not sure when they will
get off, but he will wire mother each day they are detained."

Aunt Selina nodded understandingly, and Ruth continued: "Wish you and I
could be there to welcome father when he comes! Flutey, you are so well
this morning, _don't_ you think you could go with me in our automobile,
if we traveled very carefully?"

Her aunt was so aghast at the proposition that she failed to answer, and
Ruth continued, believing that she was thinking it over.

"You see, Flutey, we really need to get to the Blue Birds and mother to
talk over this fine farm plan, and I am sure the visit will do you a
heap of good, for I have heard folks say that a change is a great thing
when you have been sick and tired of the same things about you."

Still Aunt Selina said not a word, so Ruth returned to her letter to
read it aloud. As she did so, her aunt sent a covert glance at Sally's
direction to see what effect Ruth's invitation had had upon the old
servant. But Sally, the wise, appeared not to have overheard a word.

Later, as Ruth stood beside her aunt's rocker on the veranda, she again
broached the subject.

"Flutey, the air is so warm and balmy like it always is in Indian
summer, and our car is so comfy, you wouldn't know but what you were in
an easy chair. I don't see why you can't come home with me."

"Fluff, do you know, that I could almost say 'Yes, I will go,' for I
think I would like to see all of your little friends, but I really
wouldn't know what to do with the house if I went away on a visit," said
Aunt Selina.

"Goodness me! The house won't run away. What does it do when you are
sick in bed and can't walk about to look after it? It can go on just the
same when you are in Oakdale as when you are in bed," replied practical
Ruth.

Never before had Aunt Selina been brought face to face with the fact
that Sally was the actual manager. She began to feel a certain
resentment against her faithful old servant, and then she thought what a
relief it was to have someone upon whom she could depend.

"I never did ride in one of those machines, dearie. I have said that I
never would. I always use my victoria, or coupe," she observed.

"You never rode in an automobile! Why, Flutey, you have the treat of
your life waiting, then," exclaimed Ruth, surprised. "It only goes to
show how careful we should be about saying things we are not sure of;
now, you see, you are going to ride in an auto and so prove to yourself
that you were wrong."

Ruth took for granted that the visit and method of traveling had been
decided upon, and, after some more futile excuses, Aunt Selina was won
over to considering going the next day if it were clear.

"But the sky looks cloudy, Fluff, and your mother may not spare the car
to-morrow," she objected, making a last brave stand against the
persistent little girl.

"Oh, no, those clouds are not rain clouds--they are wind and mother
would borrow Mrs. Catlin's car if she had to go anywhere rather than
disappoint me by not sending Ike with ours," replied Ruth, very certain
of her mother's loving cooeperation.

"Well, I shall have to break the news to Sally and see if she can spare
me for a few days," sighed her aunt, tingling with anticipation at the
unusual event, but loath to forego the hope that her presence was
necessary at home.

"I'll run and ask her to come here at once, so we can telegraph mother
about the car," said Ruth, as she ran to call Sally.

One never had to go far to find Sally, for wherever Miss Selina was,
there would Sally be found hovering about, also. Ruth caught hold of the
plump brown hand and dragged her out to the piazza.

When the important question was put before her, Sally was diplomatic
enough to stand considering whether the household could possibly be
managed without the mistress. After some time, she said, "If it t'want
dat dis wisit is jus' what you need to put you on yer feet, I would
say, 'I don' see how we'all kin manage.' But, seein' dat all de fruit
is dun up an' de fall house-cleanin' not yet due, I adwise you to be
shore an' go an' fin' healin' in de change of air."

Aunt Selina was so pleased at Sally's answer that she told her to help
Ruth telegraph at once for the car. Sally bowed and hurried away to the
telephone where the message was sent to Greenfields to be wired to Mrs.
Talmage.

The rest of the day was spent in pleasant excitement, with Ruth and her
aunt wondering what to pack in the small steamer trunk, while the whole
household felt the unusual stir of their mistress' going away for a
visit.

That evening an answering telegram came saying that Ike would leave
Oakdale at dawn in the morning so as to get to Happy Hills by noon. If
they were ready to start back at once they could arrive at Mossy Glen
before night set in.

Ruth was so joyous over the happy termination of her visit that she
could hardly stand still long enough for Sally to tie her hair ribbon.
As for Aunt Selina, she looked from her bedroom windows before retiring,
anxiously scanning the sky for any possible rain clouds. She felt as
excited as a child over its first journey away from home. Seeing the
sky a deep blue with myriads of stars gleaming down at her, she smiled
and turned out the light.

Ike arrived earlier than expected, for he made record time from Oakdale.

"Ike, do the Blue Birds know I'm coming?" she asked.

"Sure thing, Miss Ruth," replied Ike.

"And Ned--did he miss me?" queried the little girl.

"Master Ned, he went 'round like a bear wid a sore head. He was just
lost without the head of the Blue Birds," grinned Ike.

"And mother--and Ike, father? Did father wonder why I left without
seeing him," half-whispered Ruth.

Ike dropped his wrench and stood up.

"Why, Miss Ruth, I forgot to tell you! Mr. Ta'mage ain't home yet. A
wire came late last night saying he expected to get off the boat to-day,
so they are looking for him this noon."

"Oh, oh, Ike! how could you keep such grand news from me all this time!"
exclaimed Ruth, racing indoors to tell her aunt.

When Ike said he was ready to start, Aunt Selina and Ruth were helped
to the comfortable seat and robes were tucked in about them, while the
servants stood in a semi-circle about the car, smiling and nodding
good-byes.

Ike honked the siren for the benefit of the servants, then started the
easy-running machine.

Aunt Selina felt so very comfortable that she admitted the fact to Ruth.

"I never knew these cars were so easy-riding."

After passing a stretch of bad road Ike put on more speed and Aunt
Selina leaned forward to admonish him.

"Don't go fast enough to be dangerous! Are we going about eight miles an
hour?"

Ike smiled to himself as he heard the question.

"We're travelin' a bit more than eight, ma'am. I s'pose you are
'customed to that speed from drivin' horses?"

"Yes, that's it. I never like to go faster than that rate, but you are
not going too fast, yet. Be sure to slow up going around corners--we
might run into someone," she returned, settling herself comfortably back
in the robes.

Ike promised to be most careful, but dared not hint at the actual speed
they were traveling, and would have to keep up, to enable them to reach
Oakdale before night.

With the sun shining brightly, and the beautiful autumn coloring in the
foliage, the journey was most enjoyable.

About six o'clock the car reached Mason's farm and Ruth told her aunt
that there the first little city children lived all summer. Next, the
car passed Betty's home, but no one was in sight, although Ruth watched
for Betty to appear. Mrs. Catlin's beautiful home on the hill was
pointed out to the interested old lady, and then Ike turned off of the
main road and drove along the woodland road that ran by the swimming
pool. Ruth told all about it, and hoped the Nest in the cherry-tree
could be seen in the twilight.

Ike stopped under the old tree and Ruth spied all of the Blue Birds in
the Nest. She jumped out to greet them and they ran down the steps to
crowd about her. Aunt Selina was introduced and received a quaint little
curtsey from each child. Then the children said good-night and Ike drove
on to the house.

There, on the lower step, stood the long-looked-for father, and the
moment Ruth saw him, she gave a cry of joy. Mrs. Talmage and Ned stood
back in the shadow to enjoy Ruth's first sight of her father.

After the greetings were over, Aunt Selina was made to feel quite at
home in the cheery library until dinner was announced. The travelers
were too tired to dress for dinner, so they were soon seated about the
table and the conversation naturally turned to Blue Bird talk.

Ruth went to bed soon after dinner, for the day had been tiresome, and
Aunt Selina also felt the need of rest. She admitted that she enjoyed
the trip very much, but her old bones felt the strain of the long day.




CHAPTER III

THE BLUE BIRDS' INSPIRATION


School was to re-open on Thursday, and the Blue Birds had but one day
more of vacation in which to meet and plan for the Winter Nest. Of
course, they could meet after school, or Saturdays, but it seemed more
like a meeting to be able to have the whole day for planning.

By nine o'clock on Wednesday, therefore, they gathered in their Nest
while Mrs. Talmage entertained Aunt Selina on the veranda with past
doings of the children.

Mr. Talmage had to go to the city, and he said that Uncle Ben might come
back with him for a few days' visit. Uncle Ben was his only brother, the
one who had given Ned the printing outfit for a Christmas gift.

Ruth told the Blue Birds all about Happy Hills and Aunt Selina's plan
for the city children.

"Now, how shall we manage to find the children that will need the
country next summer?" asked Ruth.

"Did your aunt say who would look after so many children?" asked Norma.

"No, that is one of the things we shall have to talk over. We only got
as far as deciding that the farm was great!" said Ruth.

"Indeed, it is a fine offer," said several little girls.

"I think we will have to get the opinion of the grown-ups about the
whole plan," ventured Betty.

"Mrs. Talmage and Miss Selina are on the porch now--let's run over and
ask them what they have thought of," suggested Edith.

As the others were of the same mind the Nest was deserted. Upon reaching
the veranda, the Blue Birds were pleased to see that Mrs. Catlin was
sitting there with the other ladies. As Mrs. Catlin was a powerful ally,
she was always welcome when planning was to be done.

While the group on the piazza was deeply concerned talking over winter
work and next summer's plans, Ned came out of the house and went down
the woodland path toward the Starrs' home.

Meredith Starr and his chum, Jinks, were under an old apple-tree in the
garden orchard, and Ned joined them.

"Aunt Selina's at the house, and what do you think?"

Meredith and Jinks shook their heads and Ned continued solemnly, "She's
given Happy Hills to the Blue Birds for their poor children next
summer."

"She has! My goodness, but they will have more than they can look after
if they ever accepted such a place," cried Jinks.

"Oh, they accepted it, all right! They're just crazy about it. But the
grown-ups will have to help it along. I suppose they'll have to have so
much printing done that we'll be out of it after this winter,"
complained Ned.

"If you think that why can't we have some organization of our own?"
asked Meredith.

"Yes! why wait to be invited out of the way by the Blue Birds? Get some
club of our own going, and surprise them if they find us in the way,"
added Jinks.

"Oh, it takes a grown-up to help along such things?" objected Ned. "Why,
where do you suppose these girls would have been if it hadn't been for
mother's ideas and help?"

"I guess you're right," admitted the other boys, rolling over in the
grass again, whence they had popped up their heads at Meredith's
suggestion.

After a few moments' silence, however, Meredith sat up again and said
tenaciously: "I don't see why we can't! Daddum would help us with his
advice and your father, too, Ned. Jinks hasn't any grown-ups, but he can
get some of the fathers of the Blue Birds interested in us."

"What could we do, or where would we start?" asked Ned.

"Well, first of all, don't let's call it 'The Owls!' That name may be
all right for the editor of a paper, but I don't like it for a club,"
complained Meredith.

"We need a name that will sound so respectable that every mother will
consent to having her boy join us," said Ned.

"We might call it 'Junior Boy Scouts,'" suggested Jinks.

"Then everyone'll expect us to do just as the Boy Scouts do, and the
fact is we won't! We will have a sort of club for boys under twelve for
the purpose of having a nice time, and helping them with their work or
suggesting plans for outdoor sports," said Ned.

"If we could think of some name that would appeal to the mothers who are
so interested in the Blue Birds!" said Jinks.

After many names had been laughed down, Meredith said, "Why not call
ourselves 'The B. B. Club.' Everyone likes a secret society and the
mothers can believe we are so fond of the Blue Birds that we wanted to
keep their name for ourselves."

"Oh, but they will think we had to steal their name for want of finding
one for ourselves," scorned Ned.

"Well, if you can find anything better, tell it!" exclaimed Meredith,
vexed at his friend's laughter.

Just then, Jim, the handy man about Oakwood, joined the boys. He saw
some signs of trouble and asked what they were doing.

Ned explained about Miss Selina and the Blue Birds, and his plan for the
younger boys. Jim pondered for a few moments and then muttered, "Is
there any bird you know that goes by those same initials--'B. B.'?"

Ned thought rapidly for a few minutes, then said, "Blue Jay, no, not
that--Black Bird!"

"Bull Finch!" replied Jinks, laughing.

"Neither! What bird whistles like this?" and Jim imitated so naturally
the notes of the Bobolink that the boys knew.

"Ho! Bobolink, eh?" shouted Ned, slapping Jim on the back.

"Where would the 'B. B.' come in on that?" asked Jinks.

"Would you divide it like 'Bo-Bolink'?" asked Meredith.

"Sure not! Just plain 'Bobolink Boys' to offset the Blue Bird Girls,"
answered Jim, as he rose to go on toward the barns.

"Hurrah, Jim! I think you're a life-saver," cried Ned.

"Three cheers for the god-father of the Bobolink Boys!" shouted Jinks,
while the others cheered Jim.

"There's Don and another little chap--try the name on them and see what
they say," suggested Jim, pointing toward the front driveway where two
boys of about ten years could be seen.

"That's right. We'll see what they think of it all," returned Meredith,
rising to whistle through his fingers to attract the boys' attention.

Immediately upon hearing the shrill call from his brother, Don turned
in the direction of the apple orchard. As the two lads ran up, Ned
constituted himself chief counsel.

"Don, how old are you?" was the first question.

"Nine, goin' on ten. Why?" answered Don.

"How old is your friend?" was the next question.

"I'm ten next month," replied the little fellow.

"What's your name?" asked Ned.

"Tuck. That is what everyone calls me, but the name they gave me when I
was too little to know better, was awful--it's Reuben Wales. Just
because my great grandfather had it, they made me take it, too." And
poor little Tuck felt very much abused.

"Never mind, Tuck," laughed Ned, while the other boys rolled over in the
grass to smother their laughter.

"I don't most of the time, but when someone has to know the real end of
my name, I feel dreadful about it."

"Well, Tuck, we are planning a club for you boys and you can choose a
new name if you join," consoled Jinks.

"What's the game, Jinks?" asked Don, eagerly.

"We hope to form an organization for boys under twelve to be known as
Bobolink Boys," explained Meredith.

"What for--to build nests and then sew doll clothes, or make paper
furniture?" growled Don, who had been greatly offended to think that his
twin sister Dot would leave him for the Blue Birds.

The older boys who understood his attitude and its cause, laughed, but
Meredith explained more fully.

"Just for the sake of having fine times and getting something going for
the boys so the girls won't run the whole town. If we start a movement
called Bobolinks we can demand help from the grown-ups just as the girls
have done. We can manage to do something as big as the Blue Birds ever
did, besides having our outings and games at a club-room."

"That sounds fine," ventured Tuck.

"Fine! Why, there's my hand on it, Mete!" declared Don, as he thrust a
grimy little hand under his brother's nose.

Ned and Jinks laughed as Meredith looked doubtfully at Don's hand before
accepting it as a pledge.

"What'll we do first?" asked Don, eager to begin.

"Tuck and you must ask as many nice boys as you know if they would like
to join a club, and tell them what for," replied Ned.

"How many can we ask?" questioned Tuck.

"Oh, about thirty, I guess. I can take charge of one Nest, Jinks of
another, and Mete of another," said Ned.

"All right, we're in for it," cried Don.

"We'll report to-morrow afternoon--where?" asked Tuck.

"Better say at Jim's cottage--up by the barn."

The two younger boys ran away to seek members and the other boys looked
at each other.

"Quick work, eh? We're in for it now, so we'd better get some plans
going," laughed Meredith.

"We'd better go to your room and figure things out on paper," advised
Ned.

So the three boys who started the Bobolink Boys went to the house and
locked themselves in Meredith's den to make plans for the organization.

In the meantime, the Blue Birds had joined the ladies on the Talmage
veranda and their conversation turned to the work to be done that
winter.

"I wonder where Ned went," said Mrs. Talmage as Ruth drew a low stool to
her mother's side.

"He went over to my house to see Mete," replied Dot Starr. "Shall I go
and bring him back?"

"Oh, no, it can wait. I just wanted him to hear some of our plans so he
could print it in the next paper," said Mrs. Talmage. Then she turned to
the others.

"You see, Blue Birds, since Aunt Selina joined our ranks and proffered
Happy Hills for next summer's use, it gives us an entirely new incentive
for work. We had rather expected to take matters easy this winter, for
school does not leave much time for other work. But we have afternoons
and Saturdays."

"And Wednesdays, too, Mrs. Talmage! We all get out at two o'clock
Wednesdays, you know," added Norma.

"If I could skip music that day, I could have a long afternoon with
you," said May, hopefully.

"Well, if anyone who has studies at home for Wednesdays, could arrange
to attend to them at another time, we could have every Wednesday
afternoon for a regular meeting, too," admitted Mrs. Talmage.

Miss Selina was so interested in the children that she smiled when they
did, and puckered her brow into a frown when they did. Mrs. Catlin
amused herself watching the old lady and almost rocked off the steps in
her enjoyment.

"One thing we must discuss to-day is a suitable nest for winter. We
cannot occupy the one in the cherry tree much longer, for it is growing
windy and cool. Then, too, there must be some home-work planned for each
one to report at our meetings," said Mrs. Talmage.

"Won't there be any benefits or bazaars?" asked Ruth, who had visions
of fun in the school-house assembly room.

"We will have to earn money in some manner to help the poor children,
but that will have to be discussed later," replied Mrs. Talmage.

After an hour's discussion, Mrs. Catlin left with the parting
injunction, "Call upon me for anything--I will be on hand."

Late in the afternoon Mr. Talmage returned with his brother who was the
editor of a prominent magazine in New York. The Blue Birds had gone, and
Ruth welcomed her uncle whose visits were always a source of pleasure to
Ned and herself.

He sat down on the steps beside her and listened to her story of the
wonderful work Ned's printing press had done that summer, and of the
work required of it for the coming summer. Uncle Ben smiled as he
listened.

"Ned will be walking in my footsteps soon, won't he?" said Uncle Ben, as
Ruth concluded.

Before Ruth could reply her mother came out to welcome the visitor and
tell him of Aunt Selina's presence.

"Aunt Selina! You don't say so! Why, I haven't seen her since my
graduation from college," remarked Uncle Ben, in pleased surprise.

"She is in her room dressing for dinner," said Mrs. Talmage. "You will
find a great change working in her. Why, just think of her offer of
Happy Hills for the poor children next summer." And she proceeded to
tell the story of Aunt Selina's desire to help the Blue Bird work.

"Now that Uncle Ben is here, maybe he can help us plan some way to earn
the money for next summer," suggested Ruth.

"I believe you can! What we need is to find some way of reaching the
right children, and then to start some work that will bring us in a
regular income during the winter, for it will take a heap of money to
run a large place like Happy Hills with several hundred starved little
children living there," admitted Mrs. Talmage.

"As a man who is so mixed up in publishing, you would naturally expect
me to know some way out of your troubles, eh?" laughed Uncle Ben. "Well,
well, let me think it out."

At that moment the dinner bell rang and no further opportunity was given
for discussing ways and means.

So absorbing was the theme, however, that talk soon drifted around to
the subject of farms, work and plans.

"You can get a list of names of poor children at the Bureau of Charity,"
said Uncle Ben.

"That only records names of families who will apply for assistance; but
the ones like the Ferris family, never are heard from in this way. Those
are the children we want," said Mrs. Talmage.

"When I return to the city I will see if there is any way of getting a
list like you want. As for institutions--you can find all of the asylums
and homes in the New York Directory. From them you can select numbers of
crippled or sick children," suggested Uncle Ben.

"Ben, do you believe circulars are a good means of letting people know
what you want?" asked Mrs. Talmage.

"I can't say that I do. In my experience I have found that a circular
letter meets the same end as an undesirable advertisement. Most of them
are thrown into the waste basket."

"We need philanthropic women to help us next summer. Mrs. Starr offered
me her woods at Oakwood if her family goes to Maine, and Mrs. Catlin
wishes to rent the Mason farm for children. So now, with Happy Hills on
our list, we will need just the right kind who will love the work with
us," said Mrs. Talmage.

"Better send someone to visit the women you hear about," advised Mr.
Talmage.

"But I need to find the women first," returned Mrs. Talmage,
plaintively.

"What's the matter with the _Chirp_? Can't we print a story in that and
mail it to a list of folks in New York?" asked Ned.

"That sounds good to me! I should say the _Chirp_ would do the work
better than a letter or circular," said Uncle Ben.

"Yes, it does seem like a fine suggestion," admitted Mrs. Talmage. "We
will talk it over this evening, Ned."

"Why, when the _Chirp_ comes to my office," said Uncle Ben, "I generally
drop all of my important work until I see what new scheme the children
have worked up. I sit back and enjoy every word there."

"Maybe that is because your nephew edits it--sort of family pride in one
who is following in your footsteps," teased Mr. Talmage.

"Not a bit of it! It is because the lad is original enough to fill a
gap, and persistent enough to keep a good thing going. I haven't the
least idea but that the Blue Birds would never have been heard of
outside of their little Nest if it hadn't been for Ned and his _Chirp_,"
commended Uncle Ben.

"We are all certain of that," assented Mrs. Talmage.

"And we are very grateful to Ned for all he has done to help us along,"
added Ruth, smiling at her proud brother.

"Mother, you said you wanted to speak to Uncle Ben after dinner, but may
I have him alone for a few moments before you get hold of him?" asked
Ned, in a worried manner, as if Uncle Ben would be used up if the ladies
talked to him first.

Everyone laughed, and Mrs. Talmage said, "Why, certainly, Son, if Uncle
Ben is courageous enough to trust himself to your hands."

"I'm shaking in my boots already," said Uncle Ben, "for I'm sure some
dark plot will be uncovered."

"Just wait and see!" laughed Ned, as he excused himself and ran to his
den.

As the rest of the family rose to leave the table, Uncle Ben said in an
aside to Mr. Talmage, "I believe that this farm idea will require a
regular organization to take proper charge of its affairs. Just a few
ladies and children cannot handle so important a task."

"I think you are right, Ben," said Mr. Talmage.

Ned was waiting for his uncle as he came down the hall, and catching
hold of his hand, dragged him into his sanctum where the _Chirp_ was
printed each week.

Uncle Ben sat down in the one arm-chair and waited while Ned locked the
door and pulled down every window shade.

"This is a great secret, you know," explained Ned.




CHAPTER IV

THE BOBOLINK BOYS FOUNDED


"Now, Uncle Ben, we can make ourselves at home," said Ned, as he sat
upon a box in front of his uncle.

"Oh, maybe you'd like to smoke, Uncle Ben?" continued Ned, recalling
that most men liked an after-dinner smoke. "I shall never use tobacco
myself, because I have studied just what effects it has on one's system,
but I won't object to your smoking if you wish."

Uncle Ben threw back his head and laughed uproariously.

"Does that mean that you will sit calmly by and see me ruin my health
with tobacco, and not interfere?" laughed he.

"Oh, no, you know I didn't mean it that way, although it did sound
funny, didn't it?" replied Ned.

"Well, Son, I never smoke, either. I believe a man is a better thinker
and cooler business man without it," said Uncle Ben. "But, tell me,
what is the tremendous secret that made you lock the door and pull the
blinds?"

"Here it is," whispered Ned, leaning over toward his uncle. "You see,
when the Blue Birds started, I hadn't a thing to do, because the Starr
boys were at camp and many of the other boys away with their families;
so I undertook to print the _Chirp_ for the girls. I liked it, too. But
they are planning so much for next summer that it will take a regular
printer to turn out their work. Their organization freezes out the boys,
yet we helped in every way this summer."

Uncle Ben nodded comprehendingly.

"Well, this afternoon, we boys got together and said, 'What's to hinder
us from getting up a club for boys under twelve?' We all thought it
would be great, so we started, and have the name, but not the plans.
What do you think of it?" asked Ned.

"You haven't told me enough about it to judge," replied Uncle Ben. "Have
you founded the club for any purpose?"

"Oh, yes! We will gather all the little chaps under twelve years of age
into one organization, and take them on hikes, teach them work, play
games, and do other things," said Ned.

"And the name of this?"

"We thought that Bobolink Boys--B. B., you see--would be great as the
initials stand for Blue Birds, too. Of course, we won't sew dolls'
clothes, or bake cakes, but we will help the Blue Birds whenever we can,
or be independent if we wish. The girls wear bird uniforms, but the boys
will wear jumpers of a certain color, with stripes for grade. We haven't
gone any further. Our first meeting was held in Starr's orchard this
afternoon," grinned Ned.

Uncle Ben sat thinking very seriously for a long time, then he asked,
"What about the _Chirp_? Drop it?"

"Oh, no! That's one reason we want something of our own to back us up.
We can all help print the _Chirp_, and with the little boys to deliver
them, or run errands, it will be easier for all of us. Then, if the
girls get up some bazaar, or entertainment and we have to print cards,
etc., it will be much easier."

"Then your plan is more for cooeperation than competition?" asked Uncle
Ben.

"Cooperation in everything a boy can help in, but not to belong to a
Nest that has to do things the Blue Birds do," explained Ned.

Uncle Ben sat wrapped in thought, and Ned wondered what he was thinking
of. Suddenly, the older man slapped his knee and chuckled with delight.

"Now what, Uncle? I know it is something good, from your face!"
exclaimed Ned, eagerly.

"Yes, sir. I believe we can pull it off--we'll try, at any rate!"
declared Uncle Ben, half to himself.

"Do tell me!" begged Ned.

"Ned, did you ever see our magazine come out? I mean did I ever show you
over the whole plant, and show you what work it takes to produce a nice
little paper book each month?"

"Once, when father and I were at your office, you took me over the
place. I told you then that I wanted to be a publisher, and you laughed
and promised to start me on the right track when I was a man. Last
winter you sent me the printing press and told me to practice," said
Ned.

"Yes, I know, but I wanted to see if you remembered. Now, I think I have
a plan that will go a long way toward giving you elementary experience
in publishing, and at the same time provide just what your Bobolinks
would like to do. It will help the Blue Birds along for next summer, and
keep them busy to prevent the Bobolinks from making all the music." And
Uncle Ben slapped his knee again, laughing as he thought of how the boys
would unconsciously start a race between the two--Blue Birds and
Bobolinks.

"I wish you'd tell me your idea!" coaxed Ned, impatiently.

"I haven't it all in shape to explain, yet, but I will hammer it
together in some way to tell you to-morrow. Where do you boys expect to
meet at your weekly, or daily meetings?" asked Uncle Ben.

"If there are but a few, I thought we could meet in this den of mine.
But later, if there is a crowd, we might secure the Y. M. C. A. boys'
room, or the reception room of the school," replied Ned.

"By Thanksgiving time you ought to be in working trim to assume any
large work I might think of, eh?" asked Uncle Ben.

"Oh, surely! Long before Thanksgiving, I should think."

"Now, don't be too sure. Boys are just as hard to muster and understand
as girls, and the plan that suddenly suggested itself for you boys to
try out is a secret ambition that I have nursed ever since I went into
the publishing business--and that was over twenty-five years ago. I have
never had time to take it up alone, and never found anyone to whom I
could trust so precious a hobby. I see how this combination of Blue
Birds and Bobolinks might bring the idea to success, but I shall have to
think it over before speaking further," explained Uncle Ben.

"Uncle, I surely am grateful for your confidence, and I shall be glad to
know when you can tell us all," said Ned.

"I wish to talk the matter over with your father first, but you may call
together some of the boys to-morrow afternoon and I will talk with them
to see how many are willing and able to help."

"Well, I suppose I must wait, but I did hope we could organize our boys
to-morrow at recess," said Ned, with an air of disappointment.

"What's to hinder your doing it?" asked Uncle Ben.

"How--until we know what we're going to do?"

"Oh, just make your plans broad enough to take in any ideas that come
along," responded Uncle Ben, rising to go.

That night after everyone had retired, Uncle Ben took Mr. Talmage down
the drive toward the woods. As they walked slowly along in the bright
moonlight, they discussed various plans suggested by the ladies of the
Blue Bird society. Uncle Ben led up, quite naturally, to the new
organization of Bobolinks.

"Al, those boys are wide awake, all right! If we were to give them a
boost now and then, there is no saying how great a philanthropic success
this undertaking may be. It may grow so far out of Oakdale limits that
the whole world may take part in it. I, for one, have decided to lend my
support and see what comes of it," said Uncle Ben, seriously.

"Great Scott! Ben; you _must_ be interested; I haven't seen you so
enthusiastic over anything in years," laughed Mr. Talmage.

"You know how interested I have always been in the publishing
work--even as a boy, like Ned is now. Well, one thing you, and no one
else, ever did know, was the hope of being able some day to circulate a
model magazine for children. I have known for years that the little
souls craved something more than the wishy-washy stuff that is given
them in the name of 'juvenile reading'--Heaven forgive the criminals!
Why, our little ones of to-day are as wide awake as grown-ups, and they
demand--unconsciously, perhaps--the same strong quality of bread and
meat reading as adults have been digesting of late years. Educational,
adventurous, interesting, work-a-day reading! But the books and
magazines in the main have not advanced to meet the demand for better
children's literature. I have long dreamed of just what I would like to
give the children of to-day." And Uncle Ben lapsed into silence.

"I never gave the subject much thought, but I suppose you are right,
Ben," admitted Mr. Talmage.

"That's just it!" cried Uncle Ben, excitedly. "No one ever stops to
think about it, but keeps right on filling the minds of their children
with stuff that never benefits them a particle. How many boys of to-day
want to read 'Mother's Brave Little Man,' or 'Jerry the Newsboy'? Bosh!
Boys of to-day want 'True Tales of an Indian Trapper,' or 'Boy Scout
Adventures,' or good clean stories--school life, or outdoor sports.
It's LIFE and HEALTH they want."

"Guess you're right, Ben," said Mr. Talmage, smiling at his brother's
denunciation of present-day literature for children.

"All right, then! Help me bring about a reform in this line. I have
studied this problem from every point of view and I really believe that
the growing youth of to-day would not acquire bad habits so readily if
they were given some occupation that would thoroughly interest them.
It's worth trying, at any rate. Let's fill them with some great plan or
ambition and see how many children will fall into the snares and
pitfalls of the past!"

Uncle Ben so inspired his brother with his enthusiasm that he, too,
declared he would do all he could to help.

"Here's a few women who accomplished wonders this summer with the little
girls. We have a crowd of boys wasting their time day by day for want
of something interesting to do. Let the fathers follow the mothers'
example and help their boys band together for some good cause!" said
Uncle Ben.

"We'll get the men together and propose it--they'll see the value of the
suggestion, just as I have," promised Mr. Talmage.

"Well, Al, now that you're interested, I have an especially fine plum to
drop into your hands. Your own son was the one to start an organization
of boys and name it Bobolink Boys."

"My Ned!" exclaimed Mr. Talmage, joyfully. "That makes me very happy!"

"That is what he wished to tell me when we went to his den. He has
organized a club for boys under twelve, just as the Blue Birds have done
for girls, and the initials are the same--B. B.;--also, they wish to
cooperate with the girls, whenever possible," explained Uncle Ben.

"Well, well!" ejaculated Mr. Talmage, smiling to himself.

"When I heard Ned outline his plan I decided to encourage the movement
if possible by confiding my pet plan to them to experiment on," said
Uncle Ben.

"When the fathers hear of this they will be as happy as I am. The
problem of keeping a boy actively engaged in some uplifting work is a
sufficient one. Ned and you seem to have solved it for Oakdale,"
admitted Mr. Talmage.

"Think so! Then you get busy and gather the fathers together to-morrow
night for a conference. We will see how many will agree to help along
the work. I will donate all of my ideas accumulated during the past
years."

"I'll telephone everyone I know the first thing in the morning. Where
shall we meet--in the library?" asked Mr. Talmage.

"Yes, and if there are too many of us we will have to adjourn to a
larger place," said Uncle Ben.

Before breakfast the next morning the Starrs' telephone rang, and Mr.
Starr was informed that he was wanted at a meeting to be held in
Talmage's library that night. Meredith and Donald knew nothing of Uncle
Ben's talk with Mr. Talmage, but they felt sure the meeting had
something to do with their plans.

Mr. Wells and Mr. Stevens were the next ones to be invited to the
meeting, and after that a score or more of fathers were invited.

Uncle Ben, who had hoped to take a few days' rest in his brother's quiet
country home, found himself very busy in working out his idea so that it
could be simply presented to the meeting of boys and men. He spent the
entire morning in jotting down ideas as they came to him.

Luncheon over, Ned caught Uncle Ben's hand and said, "You haven't
forgotten the date we made, have you?"

"You wouldn't think so if you had seen me working all morning,"
complained Uncle Ben.

"That's all right then; we boys will meet you in the big empty carriage
house this afternoon at three-thirty," nodded Ned.

"I'll be there!" laughed Uncle Ben, as Ned ran off.

The big room in the carriage house had not been used since the garage
had been built.

Ned and Ike found some chairs in the store-room, and Simon provided
several empty boxes. Long planks were placed across the boxes, making
very good benches for the boys to sit upon. A large packing case stood
a few feet in front of the benches to be used as the speaker's stand.

At three-thirty every boy who had expressed a desire to join the
Bobolinks was there with expectant looks. Uncle Ben soon arrived and
took a seat by the large box. He spread his papers out in front of him
in a very business-like way.

"Boys, I will go straight to the business under consideration this
afternoon," said Uncle Ben, standing up the better to impress his
audience.

"I think the first thing to do is to appoint a secretary."

Ned was selected, so he sat down behind the packing case to jot down his
notes.

"Have you boys formed any kind of an organization?" asked Uncle Ben,
turning to Ned.

"No, sir, not yet," replied Ned.

"Then let us attend to that now. You must have officers, and rules and
by-laws for governing the boys and meetings. Now, I should suggest that
we begin properly, and hold an election of officers."

Uncle Ben then told them the proper way to proceed, and the boys were
greatly impressed with the importance of what they were doing. When the
election was completed, Ned had been chosen President, Meredith
Treasurer and Jinks Secretary.

"Now," said Uncle Ben, "with your permission I will preside at this
meeting, instead of your new President. I will read to you what I have
written on this paper:

"First: The undersigned have met together to form an organization to be
known as Bobolink Boys.

"Second: The purpose of this organization is to provide a club for boys
under twelve years of age, that will plan healthful sport, social
meetings, and assist the Blue Birds in their work and play.

"Third: Meetings shall be arranged for by vote of members, and all other
important matters shall be discussed and decided upon at these meetings.

"Fourth: An initiation fee of ten cents shall be charged each boy
desiring to become a member of the Bobolinks, and dues of five cents a
month shall be collected from every member. Should any member find it
impossible to pay these costs he may be discharged from the obligation
by filing an acceptable excuse with the treasurer.

"Fifth: A bank account shall be opened at the Oakdale National Bank and
all funds deposited there. All bills must be paid by check signed by the
treasurer and secretary.

"Sixth: Any member found deliberately breaking any of the rules and
by-laws shall be expelled from the organization, after a meeting held to
investigate the misdemeanor."

Uncle Ben looked up from the paper and said,

"Is that the plan of organization that you boys feel will cover what you
want?"

"Oh, yes, that's fine!" cried several boys.

The others still felt too over-awed at the business-like terms just
heard, to make any sign, favorable or otherwise.

"Well, if this paper is acceptable a motion to make it official will be
received. I want to get to the principal thing for which we have
gathered," said Uncle Ben.

"Now, I shall make some suggestions," continued Uncle Ben, after the
outline had been accepted by a vote. "Are there any boys here who do not
wish to become members?"

All of the twenty-three boys wished to become Bobolinks.

"Are there any boys present who cannot pay the initial fee and regular
dues?" continued Uncle Ben.

None thought this impossible.

"After this you write down the names and addresses of every boy who
applies for membership."

Ned made a note of it in his book.

"Now for a catechism: This is very important," said Uncle Ben, looking
about at the boys. "And answer truthfully!"

"Ever smoke?"

"Ever drink?"

"Ever gamble?"

"Ever swear?"

"Ever steal?"

"Ever fight?"

"Ever play hookey?"

"Ever strike anyone weaker than yourself?"

"I noticed that most of the boys smiled when I said 'hookey,'" ventured
Uncle Ben, critically. "But let me tell you! 'Hookey' is an
innocent-looking vice that leads to great trouble. It is the seed of
being unreliable. A man who is unreliable is a failure in the beginning.
So, boys, beware of 'hookey'!"

The boys felt the serious import of the words and each vowed to forego
the delight in playing hookey when fishing was good, or when baseball
was being played in town ten miles away.

"Have any of you boys ever been in a printing plant and watched the
process of turning out papers?" asked Uncle Ben.

Almost every boy raised his hand instantly in answer to this question,
for what boy had not stood at the village printer's yearning to set type
or run one of the fascinating presses?

"Fine!" smiled Uncle Ben. "And now how many can set type or do small
jobs on the press?"

Very few could do this, but the Starr boys and Jinks often helped Ned
with printing the _Chirp_ on his small press, and a few other boys knew
something of the work.

"Well, I'll have to explain to you what kind of work is required of a
firm that prints papers or publishes a magazine. You may think this has
nothing to do with your organization, but you will soon see," said Uncle
Ben.

As the speaker turned to take up several sheets of paper, a noisy
chatter was heard outside the house and in another moment all of the
Blue Birds, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Talmage, Mrs. Catlin, and Miss
Selina, entered the room.

"In passing, we heard the harangue going on in here, and found out from
Mr. Talmage that a secret meeting was under way. We would love to hear
the motive and perhaps suggest an idea now and then," laughingly said
Mrs. Talmage.

The Bobolinks looked at each other, and Uncle Ben said, "Members, shall
these intruders be ejected, or shall this organization extend the first
courtesy to one we hope to assist in the future?"

The boys giggled, for the manner of presenting the case appealed to
every one of them, and eliminated any feeling of intrusion from the Blue
Birds.

"One item to be written in our by-laws must be: 'Consider the ladies
first,'" announced Ned, standing.

"The visitors are welcome!" said Uncle Ben, making a ceremonious bow.

"But please remember, visitors, this is a business meeting, not a social
function, so I must ask the ladies to find their own seats and not
disturb the gentlemen," said Mr. Talmage.

The ladies were soon seated in a corner where Ike placed some boxes, and
the Blue Birds squatted upon carriage robes spread out on the floor by
Simon. When all was orderly again, Uncle Ben proceeded with his
discourse.




CHAPTER V

UNCLE BEN'S BUSINESS TALK


"Ladies and gentlemen!" said Uncle Ben, bowing politely to each group;
"You may not know that I have always had one hobby--something like my
nephew here--and that is still, printing. My present position as editor
of a magazine does not satisfy my craving for the printer's workshop,
but it is as near as I can come to it, so I have bided my time until an
opportunity like the present one offers.

"Before I confide to you what the present offer is, I wish to explain
somewhat the working of a magazine plant. I believe it is necessary to
tell you how much hard work is attached to the business, and some of the
enjoyments when the magazine is ready to go out.

"The first thing is to have the right kind of a story, or article. To
find this it is necessary to read many, many manuscripts. We employ
'readers' for this work of selecting what we can use. The manuscripts
we cannot use are returned to the writers. After the first reader passes
on a story, another reader goes over it, and if it seems suitable, it is
handed to the editor. The editor decides whether or not to accept it. If
accepted, he has to go over it very carefully. Sometimes words are
changed, lines inserted, or whole paragraphs cut out.

"If the story needs illustrating an artist is sent for. If a soft-toned
illustration is desired, the artist makes a 'wash drawing'--meaning a
black and white painting done with brushes, as in a water color. The
'wash drawing' is then sent to the engravers and a 'half-tone' plate
made for use in the magazine. 'Half-tones' are made of copper sheets
with the picture photographed upon them.

"Sometimes we want an outline to illustrate the story. A pen and ink
sketch is required for this, and is made about twice as large as it will
appear in the magazine. This is reproduced on a zinc plate, and is
called a 'line cut.'

"Then the story is given to the linotypers. A linotype machine is very
interesting. It has a key-board almost like a typewriter. When a letter
is struck on the board, a piece of brass containing the impression of
that letter moves into place just like a soldier starting to form a
line. When the next letter is struck, the corresponding brass soldier
hurries into place beside the first one. This continues until a whole
line has been 'set.' Then the operator touches a lever, the line of
brass pieces moves to a new position, and molten type-metal is poured
into the mold which the brass pieces help to form. The lead at once
hardens, and the whole line is ready for printing, in one solid piece.
All of this is done very fast--much faster than I can tell you about it.
It is hard to believe that a machine can do all these things so quickly
and so accurately.

"When the linotype work is completed the printer places the lines of
type on a 'galley.' Then the type is covered with ink, a piece of paper
is laid on, and a heavy roller passed over it. This impression is called
the 'galley proof.' If the linotyper has made any mistakes in spelling
or printing, they have to be corrected.

"After the 'galley proofs' are corrected, the dummy--a blank-page book
just the size the magazine will be--is made.

"Before us, are all the pictures and reading matter to be used. These
are arranged and pasted into the dummy in the order in which they are to
be printed. Sometimes a page has a little space left at the bottom, and
this must be filled with a neat ornament or a verse. Sometimes an
article is too long, and then it must be cut down and made to fit the
allotted space.

"Thus, the whole magazine is 'dummied' with pages of cut-up galley
proofs and picture proofs, until it looks more like a child's scrap book
than a magazine model.

"This dummy goes back to the printer, who picks out the galley-type and
measures it off to compare with the pages of the dummy. This done, he
places the type in a form the size of the page, places the numeral of
the page at the top or bottom, with the name of the magazine at the
top--this is known as the 'running head,' as it runs along the top of
each page throughout the book.

"The printer next makes a page proof. That is, he makes a proof of each
page. These pages are sent into the editorial room again, and are gone
over carefully and compared with the galley proofs; if everything is
correct each page is 'O.K'd.' If, however, there are errors, note is
made of it in the margin on the page proof.

"When all the pages are 'O.K'd.' the page forms are 'locked up'
together, sixteen, thirty-two or sixty-four, in one big form, and
arranged so that when the sheet of paper is printed and folded, the
pages will come in the right order."

So Uncle Ben continued his talk about magazine making. He explained the
workings of different kinds of printing presses, how some print directly
from the type "made ready" on a flat bed, the paper being fed into the
press in flat sheets, and how some of the big presses print from curved
plates that fit around a big roller, the paper running into the press
continuously from an immense big roll as wide as the press. He told
about the wonderful folding and stitching machines, and many other
interesting things.

During Uncle Ben's talk, everyone had been so interested that not a
sound was heard. When he concluded, however, the tension relaxed and his
audience began asking questions.

"This is most instructive, but I can't see where it helps the Bobolink
Boys in their organization," said Mr. Talmage, quizzically.

At mention of the name "Bobolink Boys" the Blue Birds looked at each
other, and then at their elders for information.

Uncle Ben saw their wonderment, and laughingly explained the plot. The
girls were delighted, and had so much to say to one another that it
seemed as if no further business could be attended to that day.

Uncle Ben, however, rapped loudly upon the box.

"We have many important things to attend to," he said, "and all are
requested to sit still and listen. I am going back to New York in a few
days, and in the meantime I should like to help start the boys on the
right road to success. Now, what you all want to know is, 'How does my
talk about magazines help the Bobolink Boys?'

"Well, this is the way: For the past half-score of years or more, I have
longed to issue a magazine for young folks that could reach out into
every plane of life; for the poor children in institutions; for the slum
children; for rich children, for children in the city and children in
the country--for every one of them!

"I would like to give so much instructive reading matter on its pages
that the schools will circulate it among the pupils; I would like to
have the pictures of the very best; I would like it to inspire boys and
girls to read better books, and make them ambitious to make the most of
their chances; I would like it to teach them to make things and do
things for themselves; in fact, I would like to make it the best and
finest magazine ever published! But I haven't had time to experiment
with my hobby and being an old bachelor I am afraid I do not understand
children well enough to know how to write for them. The plan that I have
been figuring out seems to fit most beautifully with the Blue Birds' and
Bobolinks' work."

Uncle Ben hesitated a second, but not a sound was heard. Then he
continued:

"Mother Talmage asked me last night about how much it would cost to send
circulars to people who might be interested in the farms next summer. I
propose that we start a children's magazine and use its pages whenever
there is an announcement of importance. If you want donations of money
or help of other kinds, ask for them through the pages of the magazine.

"With the Blue Birds to write articles each month telling other children
what they are doing, or how to make the things they are being taught to
make, and the Bobolink Boys to write the experiences of their daily work
and play, and some of the grown-ups to contribute poems and stories, of
course it would be necessary to have contributions also from some of our
best writers, and I know I can get them for you."

The idea of such a stupendous undertaking made the children gasp, but
Mr. Talmage said, "All you have said is fine, Uncle Ben, but who will
set type, buy paper, print, bind and circulate such a magazine?"

"That's just the thing! Don't you see? My very great interest in this
plan will compel me to help in every way and all the time, and the boys
will be kept busy at profitable and interesting work. When all the
manuscript is in, and turned over to me I will see that it is set, and
the proofs sent back to the children. The Blue Birds will enjoy making
the dummies, pasting in the pictures, and arranging the pages; and the
Bobolinks can proceed to print the magazines. If you don't expect to use
this carriage house for anything it may as well be turned into a
print-shop. With all these boys to work, the printing ought to be great
sport and not much trouble to get out a magazine."

The Blue Birds were clapping their hands in excitement while the
Bobolinks jumped up, and in their eagerness, crowded about Uncle Ben,
overwhelming him with so many questions that he was quite overcome.

Then Miss Selina stood up in the road-wagon, and after silencing the
noisy crowd, made an announcement.

"I'll pay for the paper that will be needed for the experiment the first
month!"

"Hurrah, hurrah! for Aunt Selina!" shouted Uncle Ben, and the rest
joined in with such good will that Aunt Selina sat down and held her
hands over her ears.

"I'll pay postage on a sample issue!" called Mrs. Catlin.

Again the joyous young publishers-to-be burst forth into cheers.

"What can I pay for?" laughed Mrs. Talmage.

"You'll soon find that you are paying the heaviest tax of all in
overseeing the publishers," replied Uncle Ben.

"How soon can we start?" demanded the Bobolinks.

"What shall we write?" asked the Blue Birds.

Uncle Ben raised both hands for silence, and as soon as order was
restored again, he spoke.

"We have just installed new machines in our printing plant in New York
and intend selling the old ones to some small job printer who can use
second-hand machines. Now, I can pick out a small press, stitcher, and
other things that you will need, and ship them out here. You have
electricity here, and a small motor will furnish the power. When you are
ready to go to press, I will send out an experienced man from our shop
to direct the work and see that everything is done properly. The
addressing and wrapping can be done by all of you. Of course, as far as
we have gone, it all sounds like great sport, but there is another side
to this plan that must be thoroughly agreed upon before we go any
further. If you start this undertaking, you will have to keep on with
it. At a certain date each month your periodical must be ready for
mailing. You will have to write and edit, and print, whether the skating
is fine, or the gymnasium is at your disposal, or whether Thanksgiving
dinner makes you feel lazy, or a toothache keeps you awake all night.
Publishing work is very interesting, most instructive, and profitable,
but it is work, work, work, and not all play!"

"Oh, we know that, Uncle Ben," said Ned. "And we'll promise to take all
of the consequences that go with the game."

The other boys seconded Ned's statement, and the Blue Birds eagerly
agreed to the plan, so Uncle Ben really had no further objections to
make.

"Oh, I can hardly wait to begin my page," cried Ruth.

"I'd rather see the magazine--maybe it will be a home-made looking
thing!" exclaimed Dot Starr.

"It will not! Not with us boys to boss the plant!" bragged Don, her
twin.

"If it is home-made, you'll have to do it all again," commented Uncle
Ben.

"That is where Mrs. Talmage's work comes in," laughed Mr. Talmage.

"It will be a regular magazine, all right!" exclaimed Mrs. Talmage
emphatically.

"We boys will see to it that no magazine is mailed that will make folks
laugh at us," guaranteed Ned.

"I'm sure I placed my hobby in the right hands, for you children seem to
take a pride in doing things well," commended Uncle Ben.

"And with a nephew stepping right in his uncle's footprints, why
shouldn't things be done right?" laughed Mr. Talmage.

"Say, Uncle Ben, how long must we wait before we can begin?" asked Don
Starr.

"Get as busy as you like to-morrow after school," replied Uncle Ben.
"I'll run into town and attend to having the things shipped here as long
as you have agreed to my plans; you boys may start making benches,
tables, or whatever will be needed in the plant."

"They'll need a desk, some chairs, a table and a few other things,"
suggested Mr. Talmage, looking around. "It might be advisable for them
to partition off a corner of this room for an office."

"I have a good roll-top desk in the store-room at home; it has never had
any use since Mr. Catlin passed away. The boys shall have that," offered
Mrs. Catlin.

"And I can spare that long table we used to have in the dairy before we
installed the patent butter machines," added Mrs. Talmage.

"In case I find any other pieces of Mr. Catlin's office furniture I will
send them over with the desk," said Mrs. Catlin.

"About those machines, Ben! How much will they cost the boys?" asked Mr.
Talmage.

"I thought of assuming the cost, and any time the publishers give up the
work I can easily sell them in the city. The children can pay the
freight charges, which will not be very heavy," replied Uncle Ben.

"Then, there will really be no heavy expense to start with, will there?"
asked Mrs. Talmage.

"No, but a tax of application and interest will be necessary," smiled
Uncle Ben.

"We will agree to pay all of that you want," promised several of the
boys.

The Blue Birds did not have much to say about the machines and workshop,
but each felt that it was to be their very own magazine, so that their
interest and pleasure in every new development were keyed to the top
pitch.

"Betty, what page do you want to take charge of?" asked Norma, eagerly,
as they left the carriage house.

"I think we had better defer discussing that part of the work until we
can all sit down quietly and talk it over," said Mrs. Talmage.

The men and boys remained with Ike to decide what boards and lumber
would be needed for the morrow, so work could begin on their workrooms.

"Let's have a sign for the front over the door," suggested Jinks. "I'll
paint it at home."

"Call it 'Bobolink Boys Publishing Company,'" ventured Meredith.

"Oh, that wouldn't be fair to the Blue Birds if they are going to help
in the work," said Ned.

"Name it 'Blue Bird & Bobolink Company,'" said Uncle Ben.

This last suggestion struck everyone as being just right, but Mr.
Talmage made a good amendment.

"Why not have a mysterious combination? Every mortal is interested in
finding out a puzzle, or secret. The more elusive a thing is the more
they chase it. Now, get folks guessing over your name and they will not
forget you so soon. I just thought of the name of 'B. B. & B. B.
Company.'"

"That's great, father, but we haven't thought of a name for the
magazine," cried Ned.

"Add a few more 'B's' to the others," laughed Uncle Ben. "We'll name it
the 'B. B. B. B.,' published by the 'B. B. & B. B. Co.'"

"What does 'B. B. B. B.' stand for?" asked Mr. Talmage.

"'Blue Bird Bobolink Bulletin,'" replied Uncle Ben.

"That's mystery enough, I'm sure," laughed Mr. Talmage.

After a few more remarks, the first meeting of the organization whose
influence was to be far greater than had been hoped for by Uncle Ben, or
the boys who had started it, was dismissed.




CHAPTER VI

BEGINNING THE WINTER WORK


It is needless to say that the moment school was dismissed the following
afternoon every boy and girl who was interested in the new Publishing
Company, ran toward the carriage house at Mossy Glen. The teachers,
pupils, and even some of the members of the Board of Education had heard
of the plans made the day before--for in a small community like Oakdale,
news travels rapidly--and the men on the school board were as much
interested in the success of the children's work as if it had been their
own undertaking.

Ike had found some splendid pine boards, a number of two-by-four joists,
plenty of odds and ends of railing, posts, moulding, and other trim that
would make a boy delight in amateur carpentry work.

Nails, screws, hammers, saw, and tools of all kinds were provided, so
that each boy could work without delaying or inconveniencing the others.
Ike and Simon were to superintend the construction and show the boys
how to put things together properly.

Uncle Ben and Mr. Talmage, who went to the city early in the morning to
attend to the shipping of the machinery, had not yet returned.

The Blue Birds gathered merrily in their Nest in the cherry tree, with
several little girls who had been away during the summer and were eager
to join the Nest.

Miss Selina insisted upon walking along the path from the house when
Mrs. Talmage started for the Nest and, upon arriving at the foot of the
steps that led up to the Nest, looked up imploringly.

"Flutey, I believe you can get up here if I help you!" exclaimed Ruth,
seeing her aunt's expression.

"Oh, no, dearie! What about the rheumatism in my ankles?" groaned Miss
Selina.

"Leave it behind!" laughed Ruth, gayly hopping down from the Nest.

"I wish I could!" declared Aunt Selina, taking a firm hold on the
handrail and trying to lift up her foot.

"Ouch! that hurt my knee-joint!" cried she.

"Flutey! That's no way to leave that rheumatism behind!" reprimanded
Ruth. "Now, make up your mind to walk right up and forget the nasty
little pain."

Mrs. Talmage and the Blue Birds were hovering over the railing of the
Nest to advise the two at the foot of the steps. Dot Starr, with her
usual bluntness and funny way of expressing herself, called down to Miss
Selina:

"Flutey, you just feel those twinges in your joints because you're
spoiled. Mumzie says I am always sicker if I let myself be fussed over
and spoiled. _She_ just says, 'Try to forget it.' Now, if you were me,
you never would be down there a second, but you'd jump here two steps at
a time. So, I say like Mumzie would, forget you're not me, and we'll see
you pop up here like magic!"

Aunt Selina felt like rebuking Dot, but the children smiled
sympathetically and knew Dot was sincere in her desire to help the old
lady, so the invalid replied instead,

"Dot, that is just the trouble! I can't forget the habits of seventy
years. I wish I could make-believe I was as young and spry as you are."

"If you wish, then you can! Remember the story of Sarah Crewe?" cried
Ruth, helping Miss Selina to the next step.

"I saw an old lady up in Casco Bay town last summer who was older than
you and she never had time to remember her age, because she had to work
all day for other folks. She said she slept like a baby every night.
Daddum said one reason she looked so young was that she hadn't time to
worry about growing old," said Dot.

"If I had had to work for others instead of being pampered until I
couldn't do a thing for myself, maybe I would feel as young as anyone,"
admitted Aunt Selina.

Meantime, without being conscious of the act, the old lady was being
helped up the steps by Ruth, until, at the last words, she reached the
top.

"Why, I'm up and never knew it!" she laughed.

"That's just the way to forget!" cried Dot, clapping her hands.

"And you've left your troubles behind as I told you to," added Ruth.

A chair was placed for Aunt Selina who looked about the Nest with keen
interest.

"Mary Talmage, I just wager this was all your idea, wasn't it?" she
commented, as she noted the sides of the Nest covered with straw
matting, and the cute wicker table and chairs.

"Yes, Flutey, it was. But listen until we tell you how we found this
Nest and the furniture," said Ruth, and all the Blue Birds chirped in to
tell the story about the Nest and how the furniture was found hidden in
unexpected places about the lawn and in the shrubbery.

Aunt Selina chuckled, but Mrs. Talmage spoke with some seriousness.

"Blue Birds, time is flying, and we must talk about our magazine."

Ruth then explained the presence of the children who wished to join the
Nest. Mrs. Talmage looked sorry.

"Dearies, I would like to have you with us, but really I cannot take
proper charge of more than I have at present. I want to do the work
right and that will be impossible with too many in one Nest. But I have
a suggestion to offer. Mrs. Catlin is so interested with us in the work
that I am sure she will gladly start you in a Nest of your own. She has
plenty of time, and a beautiful place, so you will be just as happy
there as here. We can all meet when necessary and talk over affairs
together. I will write a note to her and explain, then you can take it
over."

"I know Mrs. Catlin! We live on the same street!" exclaimed one of the
children.

"I guess we all know Mrs. Catlin, and like her; if we can't join Ruth's
Nest, I'd like to be in one of Mrs. Catlin's," said another little girl.

After bidding them good-by as they ran across the lawn, the Blue Birds
settled down to hear the plans for work on the magazine.

"I have some ideas which I would like to present to save time," said
Mrs. Talmage.

"I apportioned a page to each one of you to edit and expect you to have
the line of writing that best suits your ability.

"For instance," continued Mrs. Talmage: "To Dot Starr, who did the
cut-out paper furniture so well at the school-house this summer when we
made the paper doll houses for the city children, I gave a page called,
'What Can Be Made of Paper.'

"To Edith, who always makes such good candy, I gave the 'Candy Kettle.'

"To Betty, who is clever with her pencils, I gave the 'Drawing Lesson.'

"To Ruth, who loves housekeeping, I gave 'Household Hints.'

"To Norma, who likes to sew, I gave the 'Doll's Wardrobe.'

"To May, who takes such good kodak pictures, I gave the 'Camera Corner.'

"To Frances, who is an adept at puzzles and games, I gave 'Puzzledom.'

"There are besides many other pages to edit which I think will have to
be done by the boys, and some grown-ups, so I just jotted down the names
of the boys that I think are capable of doing it.

"I gave Ned a page for 'Domestic Animals,' Meredith Starr can have a
page on 'Wild Animals,' and Jinks a page on 'Insects and Reptiles.'

"Then, there will be need for other articles which the other boys can
supply, and they can all help with the publishing. I shall write to an
old friend who was judge of the Juvenile Court for years, and most
likely has very interesting stories to tell. Another well-known writer
of children's books lives in Washington, D. C., and I feel quite sure
of her interest when I tell her what our plans are. Besides, Uncle Ben
knows people who will contribute, as he told us so."

"Oh, Mrs. Talmage, do you really believe the magazine will be so good
that folks will subscribe for it?" questioned Norma.

"Why, of course! Didn't you hear Uncle Ben say that he would be ashamed
to send anything less than a real magazine through the mail?--That we
would have to do our work over again if it was poorly done?" said Mrs.
Talmage.

"Just think! My name on a magazine page with my cut-out furniture on
it!" cried Dot, hugging her sides.

"How many folks will get one, do you suppose?" asked Betty.

"The more the merrier," laughed Mrs. Talmage.

"Mother Wings, how do people get a list of names where children want a
magazine?" asked Ruth.

"Oh, different ways. Uncle Ben may have a list of families where there
are children. I know dozens of friends who have children; Mrs. Catlin
does, too. Then, there are the Wells, Stevens, Starrs, and so on: all
families who know other families where there are children. Why, friends
of mine in England and Germany will take this magazine if I send them a
sample copy. And so a list grows when everyone tries to help."

"If we are only printing this magazine to help along our farms for poor
children I don't see why anyone in Europe would want to take the paper,"
said Dot.

"Don't you be so sure about that, Miss Dot!" said Aunt Selina. "After
this organization gets agoing I believe it will make such a stir that
its light won't 'be hidden under a bushel' very long. Only keep your
magazine at high-water mark, and you will see a marvel before the year
is over."

Aunt Selina's remark made such an impression on Mrs. Talmage that she
suddenly realized how important their venture might turn out to be,
providing everyone did their best.

A loud halloo coming from the direction of the carriage house called the
Blue Birds' attention to the open door. Mr. Talmage and Uncle Ben were
standing there beckoning for the Blue Birds.

Aunt Selina found she could get down from the Nest quite nimbly, and
all started toward the building which was to be known in the future as
the "Publishing House."

Inside, about twenty boys were sawing, hammering, and calling to each
other while Ike and Simon bossed the work. At one side of the entrance
the front corner of the large room had been measured off, and a
partition about six feet high erected. This office had a wide window in
front, and a closet on the side wall. The partition was of oak-stained
ceiling boards that had been taken out of an attic chamber of the
Talmage residence when that room had been refinished. The partition had
a door to match, and the boys' work was exceptionally good. Six boys
were busy completing the nailing of the partition and two more were so
engaged upon hanging the door that the visitors were scarcely noticed.

"Hi, there! Jinks, start that screw, will you?" called Ned, trying to
balance the door on his toes while the hinge insisted upon slipping out
of the notch that had been made for it.

"I will, if you will stop wriggling the old thing!" replied Jinks, who
had pinched his finger several times and had become wary of the
unsteady door.

Ike saw the difficulty the boys were having and, while the Blue Birds
stood watching the struggle, came over and offered to help them.

"This scene is as good as a vaudeville, Mary," laughed Uncle Ben.
"That's why I wanted you to see it."

"Oh, I think they have done wonderfully well," replied Mrs. Talmage,
with interest.

"They have, and Ben is so tickled with the boys' whole-hearted support
of the plan, that he is having the time of his life," added Mr. Talmage.

The other boys had made a strong bench to sit upon, and a rude table
with a board top.

The whole interior of the place was covered with sawdust, shavings, and
pieces of timber. Planes and chisels were in constant demand, and
hammers, screw-drivers and saws were all making a veritable bedlam of a
noise, when Ike called "Time."

"Too dark to see what you are doing," he explained.

"Turn on the electric lights, Ike," said Ned.

"Better not--you boys have done far more than we thought you could and
there is no use in 'driving a willing horse to death,'" advised Mr.
Talmage.

As the boys dropped tools and stretched tired arms, or bent backs, they
realized that the unusual work had made muscles ache.

"Get on your caps and coats, Bobolinks, and come out on the lawn to hear
of my trip to the city," said Uncle Ben.

In a few moments the room was empty and the children crowded about Uncle
Ben who sat cross-legged on the soft grass, while Ike placed chairs for
Aunt Selina and Mrs. Talmage.

"Well, to start at the beginning, I took the eight-ten train this
morning, and I was introduced to the Oakdale Commuters as 'Uncle Ben of
the Blue Birds and Bobolinks.' That was reference enough for anyone. I
was looked upon as a man to be envied and I even saw covert glances from
some jealous eyes that looked me up and down and saw no especial favor
to have boosted me in the estimation of the B. B. & B. B. Company."

"Now, Uncle Ben, stop your fooling and tell us about the trip," rebuked
Ruth.

"I am, Fluff, but I want to begin at the right end of the story,"
teased Uncle Ben.

"Oh, begin anywhere, only get somewhere!" cried Mr. Talmage, laughing.

With a sigh that indicated that he was misunderstood, Uncle Ben
continued his story.

"Mr. Wells, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Starr, Mr. Wilson, and many other men you
know promised to advise and assist the boys in every way possible."

"What did Daddum say?" cried Dot, eagerly.

"Don't interrupt, Dot!" admonished Meredith, sternly.

"Well, Mr. Starr offered a series of articles on his experiences in
lumber camps, and, besides, he promised to take hold of any part of the
plan in which we could use him," replied Uncle Ben. "Mr. Wells has a
book that will prove valuable for our undertaking. It is a directory of
benevolent institutions and contains the names and addresses of every
asylum or home in the country."

"Why, Uncle Ben, that is exactly what we need to find our sick children
for the farms, isn't it?" said Ruth, happily.

Uncle Ben nodded his head and continued.

"Then, Mr. Stevens offered to have his solicitors try to secure some
advertising for the magazine. His agency is one of the best in the city
and I think his offer a fine one."

At the idea of having advertisements appear in the magazine, the Blue
Birds and Bobolinks looked at each other in surprise.

"We never thought of _that_!" ventured Ned.

"Sounds like real work, when you hear the words 'solicitors' and
'advertisements,' doesn't it?" commented Jinks.

"I've been trying to make you understand from the first that this will
mean work as well as pleasure," insisted Uncle Ben.

"They'll all wake up to that fact soon enough, Ben--go on with your
story," laughed Mr. Talmage.

"Mr. Wilson, who is connected with the Oakdale Paper Mills, then offered
to donate enough paper to get out several months' issues, so I accepted
that offer with delight, thinking you could make use of Aunt Selina's
offer in some other way. Mr. Wilson is going to bring some samples of
paper over to the Publishing House soon and let us make our selections.
A man whom I just met offered to speak to the Manhattan Subscription
Agency about taking subscriptions for you and giving the magazine a
good position in their next catalogue."

"So much good luck actually turned Uncle Ben's head," laughed Mr.
Talmage, during a moment's silence. "Why, he hardly knew what he went to
the city for, and I had to guide him by the arm to show him the way to
his office."

"Of course, my friends here know better than to believe any such
scandalous tales about me!" replied Uncle Ben, looking at his brother as
if to dare him to tease any more.

The children always enjoyed these make-believe quarrels between the two
brothers, and Ned generally egged them on. To-day, however, he was too
eager to hear about the trip to the city and so urged Uncle Ben to
finish the story.

"We found the machinery that I think you can best use here, and had it
prepared for shipment. Just as we were leaving the store-room a man came
down with a load of type.

"'Where are you taking that?' I asked him.

"'Boss said to send it off to be melted down,' replied the man.

"'Just leave it on top of this packing case--I'll see that it is taken
care of,' I told him, and he did as I said.

"Now, boys, all of that type is coming out here for you to work with. I
had it charged to my account at the office, for it was a 'big find' to
get hold of some type just at the time we needed it," concluded Uncle
Ben, taking a long breath of relief.

"And now, I'll tell you of all the things Uncle Ben forgot to mention,"
laughed Mr. Talmage.

"When we left the stock-room and went to his office, he picked up the
telephone and called up more friends than I ever thought he knew. Two or
three of them were invited to lunch with us, and the others were told
about the wonderful work the Oakdale children were planning. Every one
of his friends was told to help along or suggest some way to boost the
magazine. Of course, they had to promise."

Uncle Ben chuckled to himself as his brother told about the telephone
experiences.

"Now, we come to the time when this crafty uncle of yours met his
friends at lunch. What do you think his plot was? Well, just listen and
I will tell you," and Mr. Talmage nodded his head warningly at his
brother.

"One of his guests was Mr. Connell, the man that owns one of the largest
engraving plants in the city. This Uncle Ben told his story in such an
engaging way that that business man actually offered to turn out the
plates you needed for the magazine at actual cost for several months. We
all know what that means--several hundred dollars on the credit side of
the ledger."

All eyes were turned toward Uncle Ben for confirmation of the great
offer, and he nodded his head smilingly.

"One of the best business advisers I know in New York said that he
thought you children had an unusually good idea for a successful
business investment, and hoped that you would keep it up until you were
adults and saw the financial benefit in it," said Uncle Ben, seriously.

The girls were pleased at this news, but the boys were hilarious to find
that a clever business man approved of the plan they were working out.

"When will the machinery be here, Uncle Ben?" asked Ned.

"It is coming by freight and will take a few days, but you will be kept
busy until then in finishing the shop-work," returned Uncle Ben.

"Yes, indeed, we will have to build some stands for type, too, with the
boxful you got for us," answered Ned.

"We Blue Birds spent all of our afternoon engaging editors to take
charge of the pages," ventured Ruth, who thought the Blue Birds had been
quiet too long.

"You'll have to have all the pages ready to hand over to me by the tenth
of October, you know; I'll need about three days for making linotype and
then you can have the proofs back," said Uncle Ben.

"Oh, we will have everything ready long before the tenth," laughed Mrs.
Talmage.

"From the way the Blue Birds are working, I should say that each one
will have about five hundred pages written by that time," added Aunt
Selina, smilingly.

"In that case, we will have to have each page add a notice at the
bottom: 'To be continued in our Nest.'"




CHAPTER VII

BLUE BIRD WISDOM AND BOBOLINK WORK


"There! my page is all done!" exclaimed Ruth, holding a sheet of paper
away to admire the neatly written notes for "Household Hints."

"Mine's done, too, but I'm going to copy it over to-night to make it
look neat as a pin," said Norma.

"Did you get any new candy recipes?" asked Dot eagerly.

The little Blue Bird who took charge of the "Candy Kettle" smacked her
lips emphatically.

"I haven't started to ink the pencil lines of my cut-out paper
furniture, but that won't take long," explained Dot. "I started with the
kitchen because Mumzie said no good housekeeper would furnish a parlor
if she had no kitchen equipment."

"I did my drawing lesson, but I haven't written the lesson telling the
children how to make the picture," said Betty, with a worried look
toward Mrs. Talmage.

"Plenty of time, dear," soothed Mrs. Talmage. "You know Uncle Ben said
we would have until the tenth of the month."

The Blue Birds were gathered in the cherry-tree Nest after school, one
day, waiting for the signal from the Publishing House which would tell
them they might run over and inspect the huge pieces of machinery that
had arrived that day from New York. Ike and Simon had to help the three
truckmen as they placed rollers under the press and rolled it from the
truck and into the room. The stitcher, cutter and other pieces were not
so unwieldy to move and place. At noon, Ned saw the men struggling with
the press and so refrained from going near the house, but he told the
other Bobolinks, and immediately after school was dismissed a crowd of
boys ran to their shop.

The Blue Birds had been enjoined to keep out of the way while the boys
cleared things up and investigated the various pieces of machinery. It
was a strain on their patience, however, to remain in their Nest and
listen to the laughs, exultant shouts, and sounds of satisfaction coming
from the carriage house.

All things have an end, so Uncle Ben soon appeared at the wide doorway
of the Publishing House and gave a shrill whistle for the Blue Birds.
Instantly, seven little girls took flight down the steps and across the
lawn, leaving Mrs. Talmage to assist Aunt Selina.

The Blue Birds ran in and looked about. The great, ugly, black machines
with wheels, rollers and arms everywhere, did not impress them very
favorably.

"Can't make head or tail of the thing!" scorned Dot.

"No one expects a girl to understand," replied her brother Don.

"I would be afraid of that dreadful looking knife!" shuddered Betty,
standing at a safe distance and pointing to the wide blade of the paper
cutter.

Then the children crowded about the stitcher while Uncle Ben showed the
wonderful work the machine did.

The electric attachments had not yet been completed, so the
demonstration of the machines had to be by gestures. But Uncle Ben was
equal to it, and the children felt that they could almost _see_ the
machines running as they listened to his explanations.

"Well, Uncle Ben, I don't see how we can start this work without you
superintending us," ventured Meredith.

"It all seemed simple enough when we were talking about printing a
magazine, but this job is more than I can do," admitted Jinks.

"I am at home with my little press, Uncle Ben, but these big fellows
make me want to run away from the contract we made with you," added Ned,
seriously.

The Blue Birds and younger Bobolinks heard the older boys with anxious
concern lest the entire plan should fail.

"I thought of just such a contingency and provided for it," replied
Uncle Ben, with his optimistic manner. "I realize that you all go to
school and afternoons after school do not give you much time to
experiment on these machines, so I found two young men who used to do
good work for us who were pleased to come out here for a few weeks and
show you boys how to do things. They won't come until the galley proofs
arrive, but then, they will help you get out the first issue and teach
you everything there is to know about these machines. They will take
them all apart and teach you how to put them together again. A machine
is like a man's valuable animal--if you pay no attention to its welfare,
it does not last long enough to pay you for its keep."

"We'll look after our machinery all right, Uncle Ben," agreed Ned, with
the look of the workman who truly loves his tools.

"I'm sure you will, and I hope the Blue Birds will have as much pride in
turning out commendable articles for us to print," added Uncle Ben,
looking at Mrs. Talmage.

"Oh, Uncle Ben, there's one question I want to ask--may we each sign our
own name to our page or must we make up a pretend name?" asked Ruth.

"Why, sign your very own name, of course; that is one way of making you
keep up to the mark. If you only had a pretend name on your page you
might get careless and say, 'Oh, no one knows who it is, anyway, so I
don't care if this story isn't as good as it ought to be.'"

Mrs. Talmage and Aunt Selina smiled, for they could see the wisdom of
the remark.

"I guess my father will be proud to see my name in a magazine," boasted
Dot Starr.

"All depends on what you tack your name to, Dot," laughed Meredith.

"It'll be fine, all right!" exclaimed Dot, nodding her head
emphatically.

"Shall we have our names at the top or at the bottom of the pages, Ben?"
asked Mrs. Talmage.

"Oh, please, Uncle Ben, do put them at the _top_! I am afraid no one
will stop to read our names if you have them at the bottom," worried
little Betty.

Everyone laughed, but Uncle Ben assured her that the name would be
placed directly under the name of the article.

Then, while the Blue Birds watched the boys placing type in the cases,
Uncle Ben sat down beside Mrs. Talmage and had a quiet talk about
affairs in general.

In concluding he said, "Now don't you worry if the children should
neglect a page now and then, for I can turn in heaps of good stories and
articles any time we may need them."

"Oh, these children are so reliable that they would rather do without
food or sleep than neglect anything that promises funds for next
summer's farms," returned Mrs. Talmage.

"Glad to hear it, and hope they keep it up. Now, what pages have you
provided for each month--and have you any to spare for some prominent
writers who are friends of mine and feel deeply interested in this
venture?" asked Uncle Ben.

"Oh, yes!" replied Mrs. Talmage. "We have seven pages taken by the Blue
Birds and four by the Bobolinks. Then there is a story Aunt Selina has
been thinking of writing, and a page for music that her friend in New
York will contribute. Mrs. Catlin promised to give us some tale of
adventure each month and that will take two pages. So, let me see--that
takes up, in all, sixteen pages. How many pages shall we have in the
magazine?"

"About forty-eight is the usual size for such a paper," replied Uncle
Ben, figuring out Mrs. Talmage's number of pages and making a memorandum
of the balance remaining for use.

"Gracious! then we will have to find much more manuscript than I
thought," worried Mrs Talmage.

"No, I do not think so--that is what I want to find out to-day. A very
good friend of mine who had charge of Field's Museum for four years, so
heartily endorsed this plan that he offered to supply a page article on
plant life each month. His name alone is valuable to a paper, and it
will certainly give weight to our magazine. Then, besides him, a very
close friend, who has been connected with a prominent book concern for
more than twenty years, called me up to say that this idea was just what
he has been hoping for. Both he and his wife are eager to assist in some
way. I suggested that they supply a page on bird life and give us some
valuable hints about our feathered friends. This man has published
numerous books on the subject of birds and is just the one to speak with
authority. The moment I mentioned it, he accepted my invitation; so we
have two renowned writers for most interesting and instructive pages
each month," said Uncle Ben.

"Why, how wonderful!" exclaimed Aunt Selina, who had been silent during
the conversation. "I don't see how you ever accomplish such miracles!"

Mrs. Talmage looked at Uncle Ben and said, laughingly, "Maybe it's
because we never take 'no' for an answer. We keep at an idea until it is
hammered into everyone's heart and mind."

"And the moment our friends have it well hammered in they get so
interested in succeeding that others are sought by them and the same
story hammered into another head and heart," added Uncle Ben.

"Well, I'm hammered and rooted in the work, and am anxious to have
friends in it, too. Is that the way you do?" asked Aunt Selina.

"That's just it! and before anyone else knows what's going on, dozens of
folks are working on the same idea," replied Mrs. Talmage.

"Mary said something about a story that you wished to contribute, Aunt
Selina--what is it?" asked Uncle Ben.

"An experience I had in the Civil War when I was visiting my old school
chum, Rebecca Crudup. You have never heard any of my tales of that
visit, but I assure you they are exciting."

"And you were there! Why, Aunt Selina, your manuscript would be valuable
to any magazine! I wish you would let me read it before you turn it over
to the Blue Birds," said Uncle Ben eagerly, the business instinct for
new material for his magazine pushing the Blue Birds' magazine into the
background.

"You may see it after it is published in the children's paper," quietly
replied Aunt Selina.

Uncle Ben took the rebuke in the right spirit, and said, "Is your friend
alive to-day?"

"She was until last year, but her daughter is the musician I wish to get
'rooted' in this work for a music page. I haven't her studio address, or
I would have written to her about this."

"Give me her name and the last address you knew of, and I will locate
her as soon as I get back to the city," offered Uncle Ben.

Uncle Ben wrote the name and late address in a book then turned to the
ladies with a suggestion.

"Aunt Selina's story will surely take more than the two pages you spoke
of, so why not make a serial story of her Civil War experience?"

"Splendid! That is just the thing," cried Mrs. Talmage.

"I could make it as long as you wanted it to run, for Rebecca visited me
after the war and told me plenty of her wild adventures after I returned
home from the South. Why, my coachman, Abe, was one of the Crudup
slaves. He says they all stuck close to the family, for they loved them
and wanted to remain, but Mr. Crudup lost most of his wealth in the war
and had no place or means for so many servants," related Miss Selina.

The children had made a thorough inspection of the machinery and type by
this time and had joined the grown-ups.

"What was that you were telling mother, Aunt Selina?" asked Ned, who
overheard the word "war" and was interested.

"Why, we just discovered that Aunt Selina had a very exciting time in
the South during the Civil War and she is going to write it up for your
magazine," explained Uncle Ben.

"Oh, goody, goody!" exclaimed a chorus of voices.

"It's strange that you never told us any of those stories, Aunt Selina,"
ventured Mrs. Talmage.

"Oh, it all happened so long ago, dearie, that I never thought anyone
would be interested. Besides, it turns to a page of my life that I
always wanted to keep closed," sighed Aunt Selina.

The others, respecting her reticence, changed the subject. Uncle Ben
smiled at her and made a comforting remark.

"Aunt Selina, when we finish our first year's work I am going to write a
most interesting treatise and call it, 'Aunt Selina's Recipes for
Youth.'"

"What do you mean?" she questioned.

"Just what I said," replied he, laughing. "Since you have taken an
interest in this work you have grown years and years younger in looks
and actions."

"Ben, you're making fun of me!" declared Aunt Selina.

"No, he's not, Aunt Selina; you really are looking fine," said Mrs.
Talmage.

"Aunt Selina, isn't that what I prescribed for you at Happy Hills?"
cried Ruth, exultantly.

"Yes, Fluffy, you did, and all the glory of this old conquest belongs to
you," admitted Aunt Selina, patting the little girl upon the head.

Just then, an expressman drove up and spoke to Ike.

"Right to the front door--that is the B. B. & B. B. Publishing
Company's shop," replied Ike with pride.

Uncle Ben signed for the safe delivery of a large flat box and the
children crowded about to watch Ned and Jinks open it.

The box was marked "Glass" and "Handle with Care," so Ruth ran over to
her uncle to inquire about it.

"Do you know what is in it?" asked she.

"I believe it is the box that failed to arrive with the other things,"
he replied, smiling.

"Do tell what it is," persisted Ruth.

"Why? You'll soon see, and it would spoil the surprise if I told you,"
said Uncle Ben.

Ruth skipped back to the circle formed about the case watching Ned take
out the nails very carefully. Soon Jinks and he had the top boards off
and then started to lift out the excelsior. This disposed of, a flat
paper parcel was seen. Ned lifted it out, and seeing another one
underneath, Jinks took it out also. Meredith and Don looked to see if
there were any more, but excelsior seemed to fill the bottom of the box.

"Who has a knife?" asked Ned, not finding his own in his pocket.

"Here, here! hurry up and cut the twine!" shouted Don.

Ned took Don's knife with the broken blade and rusty handle, and smiled
as he hacked away at the twine. After several vigorous efforts the
string parted and several hands hurried to tear off the heavy paper.

A large picture of Benjamin Franklin, in a heavy oak frame, came out
from its wrappings.

"Oh, isn't that fine!" cried several voices.

"Just our man, isn't he?" laughed Ned, pleased as could be.

"If I had a head like that I could invent machines, too," grumbled Don,
feeling of his round little head in disgust.

While the others laughed at the remark, Meredith turned to the other
parcel which Jinks held on the floor. The twine was soon cut and the
papers taken off to reveal the strong features of Abraham Lincoln.

"Ho, that's best yet!" cried the boys who felt a deep admiration for the
man whose picture stood before them.

Mr. Talmage and Mrs. Catlin came in during the exhibition of pictures,
and the former said, "Just what you needed to complete the office
appearance."

"Yes, indeed, Uncle Ben, and we thank you heaps and heaps!" exclaimed
Ned, carrying his picture into the office.

Jinks followed and Don started to drag away the box that stood in the
midst of the circle of children.

"Better see if there are any more!" called Uncle Ben, warningly.

Don dropped upon his knees and sought in the excelsior.

"Oh! here's some more and I almost threw them away!" he cried, as he
dragged forth several small packages.

Upon being opened they proved to be a number of pictures of famous
publishers and inventors of printing machinery.

"Won't they look just great, though!" came from several pleased boys.

"Why, come to think of it," said Mrs. Catlin, "my husband has a number
of fine plates of machines and things of that kind. He was connected
with the Vivla Machine Company, you know, and they manufactured presses
and printers' tools. They might look well if added to this collection."

Everyone agreed that the more the better, and then Dot remembered that
Mrs. Catlin had not seen the office and machinery.

"Walk right over and see how officey our office looks with your desk and
table," she cried.

"And Mrs. Talmage sent in the chairs," added Betty.

"And my mother sent the carpet," added Norma, pointing to the green rug.

"And father says we may have his typewriting machine and table here when
he's away from home," said Ruth, eagerly.

Mrs. Catlin praised the arrangement, and then asked to be shown the
wonderful machinery that was to do such great work.

"Dear me, I heartily regret that I am not a little girl so that I might
glory in this office and work," sighed Mrs. Catlin, coming back to the
grown-ups.

"You don't have to be 'little,' Therese," laughed Mrs. Talmage. "You are
one of this juvenile club as surely as if you were but ten. Why, you
couldn't pass the place without coming in to ask for news."

"To tell the truth, I was going to the village, but I heard the happy
shouts away out on the road and so I just wanted to know the cause,"
confessed Mrs. Catlin, smiling.

"I hope I may live a few years longer to see the results of this work,"
sighed Aunt Selina.

"You will, Flutey, you will!" cried Dot, enthusiastically. "What Uncle
Ben told you was really truly true!"

"And just think, Mrs. Catlin, Flutey is going to write a long serious
story for our magazine all about the war that she was in!" cried Betty
Stevens.

The grown-ups smiled at Betty's idea of a "serial" story, but Mrs.
Catlin looked surprised.

"Why, I never knew you were from the South?"

"I'm not, but I was visiting there during an exciting time, and Ben
thinks my experience will make a readable story," replied Aunt Selina.

Mrs. Catlin looked at the aged lady with interest and said how much she
would like to hear the tale. Suddenly, however, she slapped her gloved
hands together and spoke.

"Now, what reason is there that I should not have some pages in this
magazine?" she asked.

"Show us any good reason for taking our space and you may have it,"
teased Mrs. Talmage.

"Then put me down for another serial. I have a collection of short
stories that Mr. Catlin wrote of his adventures in Alaska. It does not
seem much like an adventure to go to Alaska nowadays, but forty years
ago it was as if one were leaving this hemisphere for the unknown. Some
of his tales are intensely interesting," said Mrs. Catlin.

"Why, friends, we are getting so many notable articles and writers
together that we will soon have to raise the subscription price,"
laughed Mr. Talmage.

"That reminds me that we never thought of a charge. We ought to decide
what subscription price we wish to ask," said Uncle Ben.

"Has anyone thought of that?" asked Mrs. Talmage, looking about at Blue
Birds and Bobolinks.

Heads were shaken and Ned asked, "How can we tell how much to charge
until we know what the magazine will cost?"

"I can help you figure that out, I think," offered Uncle Ben, sitting
down at the table and taking paper and pencil from the drawer.

"Figure how much five hundred--or say, a thousand will cost," ventured
Ned.

"A thousand! Where will you send them?" cried Jinks.

"I should say, figure on five thousand--or ten," said Uncle Ben,
quietly.

"What!" gasped several boys.

"Yes, because ten thousand will not cost much more than three hundred."

"How's that?" asked the boys.

"Plates, linotype, lock-up, make-ready, will cost as much for one
magazine as for one thousand. The only extra cost in getting out a
quantity is in paper, ink and time. Now, I firmly believe that we will
be able to send out ten thousand by the time you have them ready."

"Well, Uncle Ben, it sounds _awful_ big to us, particularly as we
haven't one single subscription, yet," said Ruth.

"Here--here, Fluff, don't let that bother you!" said Mr. Talmage,
throwing a five-dollar bill upon the table.

"And here's for ten more!" laughed Aunt Selina, taking a twenty-dollar
bill from her purse.

"Here's for five orphan asylums," added Mrs. Catlin placing a ten-dollar
note on the table.

"How now, Fluff--where are your blues, eh?" teased Uncle Ben.

The children saw the crisp notes lying on the table and felt the joy of
a successful start.

"From what Aunt Selina and Mrs. Talmage offered, it looks as if the
price should be two dollars per year. Now, let us figure out how close
we come to that," said Uncle Ben.

After counting up cost of production plus cost of mailing, it was
decided that two dollars would be a just price, but there would be
little profit unless more money could be gotten for advertising, or some
saving made.

"Guess we've about completed our business for to-day," ventured Uncle
Ben, as he noticed the children growing restless.

"Yes, let us go to the house and have some nice cool lemonade and
cookies," suggested Mr. Talmage.

Eager looks turned toward Mrs. Talmage, and she laughed.

"We're always ready for something good to eat, father, so you show us
the way to the picnic."

It took but a few moments for the children to reach the wide veranda and
settle down comfortably until the maids brought out the refreshments.

"A day's work always ought to finish like this," mused Don, munching a
delicious piece of cake.




CHAPTER VIII

AUNT SELINA'S CIVIL WAR STORY


The children thoroughly enjoyed their refreshments. Aunt Selina did not
care for any, so she sat smiling as she watched them.

"As long as Flutey isn't busy, wouldn't it be nice to have her tell us a
teeny-weeny bit of that war story?" ventured Dot Starr.

"Oh, yes! Please do! Flutey, do tell!" came from various directions.

"Why, that would be lovely, Aunt Selina, if you will," added Mrs.
Talmage.

Thus besieged, Aunt Selina decided to yield to the children.

"Let me see," she began. "I must have been about eighteen when my
dearest friend, Rebecca Crudup, invited me to spend Easter Holidays at
her Southern home. We had been chums from the moment we met at Miss
Wyland's Seminary for Young Ladies, and the Christmas before the time I
just mentioned, Rebecca had visited my home at Happy Hills. Mother
liked Rebecca immensely, but she feared the fighting in the South might
create trouble for me if I went with Becky. We reassured her, however,
and an unwilling consent was written from home.

"A week before the vacation began, Becky received a letter asking her to
start home as soon as she received the word, as important matters in the
family had to be looked after.

"As this would give us an extra week's holiday we hailed the letter with
joy. The girls stood about enviously watching us pack our carpetbags and
Rebecca's trunk. I packed many of my things in her trunk to save the
trouble of transporting two to Tennessee. We left the next morning
'midst shouts reminding us to be sure to be on hand when school
re-opened.

"We enjoyed the journey during the first part of the way, but, as the
train sped on, the country showed signs of the desolation wrought by
war, and we sobered from our happy laughter to serious contemplation.

"The nearer to Nashville that we came, the deeper the evidence that war
was an awful thing. We saw burned homes, devastated land and
forlorn-looking families as we passed by.

"Rebecca's father met us at the station in Nashville and welcomed me
with a surprised manner. Turning to his daughter, he spoke in a serious
tone.

"'We will endeavor to give your friend an enjoyable visit, daughter, but
it doesn't seem promisin'. Evidently you did not receive our telegram?'

"'Only this letter, father,' replied Becky, showing him the last letter
received by her.

"'Hum! well, we will live up to our reputation, Miss Selina, and be the
true Southern hosts.'

"As we came out of the station and walked toward the carriage-posts,
Rebecca looked about for the family equipage.

"Mr. Crudup led us toward a great spring wagon which was drawn by two
raw-boned farm horses. An old darky sat on the front seat.

"'Why, father! Surely we are not going home in _this_!' cried Rebecca
with deep chagrin.

"'Sorry, daughter, but it must be so,' returned her father in a grieved
voice. 'You will find many changes here since the fightin' began.'

"'Selina, I'm awful sorry you have to ride this way, and I can't
understand why it is. Father seems to know,' said Becky, in an
apologetic tone.

"'I don't mind, Becky. Really and truly, I don't. I love the country so,
that I would just as soon ride a plow if we had to, to get to your
home.'

"'Well, I'm glad your little friend is so sensible, Rebecca,' commended
Mr. Crudup.

"We climbed into the back seat after the baggage had been stowed away,
and the horses started off.

"'Father, why didn't you drive Jerry and Jim?' asked Rebecca,
wonderingly.

"'Becky, your brothers, I trust, are astride them, showin' the Yankees
how to fight!'

"'Daddy!' cried Rebecca in dismay.

"Mr. Crudup looked dreadfully sorry, but said nothing.

"'Daddy, have Newell and Ed left home?'

"'Yes, child. And I'm mighty sorry to say that most of your friends and
cousins are with them. Some will nevah return--but we are prayin'
constant, that our boys will win honahs for the South--and come home to
enjoy them.'

"Becky and I sat as stiff as sticks as we realized what this meant.

"'Still, I don't see why _some_ of our carriage horses couldn't have
come for us!' insisted Rebecca.

"'The horses have been used by some of the boys who had none, and the
spring wagon has to come in often with supplies for the troops. This
happened to be one of the days. So mothaw thought her girl would not
mind, particularly as we believed you received the telegram,' explained
Mr. Crudup.

"I was almost sorry I had come, so unexpected did my appearance seem to
be, but Becky cheered up when she saw me grow uncomfortable, and tried
to amuse me by pointing out neighboring plantations.

"As we drove about a bend in the road, Rebecca's beautiful old home
could be seen situated upon a knoll that commanded a view of the
surrounding country. We entered the grounds by a road that ran through a
dense wood, and then ascended gradually until we reached the
porte-cochere. The house itself, large, solid and in perfect condition,
was a landmark from every point of view round-about.

"Mrs. Crudup and her two older daughters welcomed me to their home and
made me feel more at ease. Rebecca, being the youngest member of the
family, was petted and made much of, and I came in for my share of it
for being her best friend.

"After our baggage was placed in our rooms, we were escorted upstairs
and left to prepare for dinner, which was generally at noon, but had
been delayed for Rebecca's arrival.

"My, but that was a delicious dinner! I can almost taste the tender
chicken with corn waffles, hot and crisp, this minute!

"Not a word had been said about the reason of calling Rebecca home a
week earlier than usual. Toward evening, however, vehicles of all
descriptions drove to the side yard and were left to the care of the
negro servants. As the neighbors came to the house they went directly to
a large room which had been closed and locked since our arrival, until
now. Rebecca and I were invited to join the sewing meeting, but neither
of us liked sewing, and we had planned to visit the horses before it
grew too dark. However, I saw heaps of flannel garments, half-finished
socks on knitting needles, warm caps, and clothes of all kinds being
made up for the Confederate soldiers.

"Becky and I strolled down toward the stables, but it was too dark to
inspect the thoroughbreds I had heard so much about, so we returned to
the house.

"As we passed the great barn we saw men busily engaged in packing all
kinds of produce and supplies in long hemp sacks to be carted to
Nashville the following day. In the sewing room the ladies were still
plying needles that flashed in and out as if speed would save a life.

"At eight o'clock a hot supper was served, and at nine the neighbors
left for their homes.

"That night, after we retired to our rooms, Rebecca came into my room
for a cozy chat. She looked very pretty as she sat on the corner of the
bed hugging her knees up in her arms.

"'Selina, it's a shame you are dragged into such a vacation! I declare,
had I known that all of the boys were away, nothing would have tempted
me to bring you. Even the girls are too busy sewing for their
sweethearts to bother with parties or sociables,' pouted Rebecca.

"'I came to visit you--not to see the boys or go to parties, and I want
you to believe that I don't mind a bit having you all to myself,' I
said.

"'You're a good little mouse to say that, but, all the same, I will trot
you all over the country on our saddle horses. You will have plenty of
fresh air, and that is what Miss Wyland said you needed for your
paleness,' replied Becky.

"Rebecca kissed me good-night, but I felt ill at ease in that Southern
home for being one of the 'detested Yankees.' Never, by word or sign,
was such a thought given out, but I felt that everyone would have been
more at ease had I never come.

"Every other afternoon Mr. Crudup went to Nashville with a load of bags
for the commissary department. One afternoon, about a week after our
arrival, he came back from the city earlier than usual and we noticed a
troubled look on his face.

"'How now, father?' asked sweet Mrs. Crudup.

"'Reports in Nashville say that the fighting is turned toward this part
of the country,' he said.

"'Someone has to bear the burden--perhaps the Lord has selected us to
carry a share,' returned Mrs. Crudup, reverently.

"'The one thing that worries me is that our place is well known in this
part of the country, and our fertile acres are known to produce the
finest edibles. Then, too, the fact that we raise some of the best-bred
horses in Tennessee may cause the Yanks to come down on us at any time
and raid the stables. In that case, they will carry off everything--not
even a plow-horse will be left.'

"'Father, our boys have had all they could use for this conflict, and
wouldn't it be bettah to ship our horses to Nashville fo' the army to
use?' asked Mrs. Crudup.

"'I would rather see every head of cattle dead than in the hands of a
Yankee!' cried Sally Crudup, bitterly, for her sweetheart had been
killed in a battle a few weeks previous.

"'Sally, Sally! let no bittehness feed your sorrow!' reproved the gentle
mother, patting me upon the back as if in apology for her daughter's
breach of etiquette.

"Mr. and Mrs. Crudup walked away in private converse, and Becky and I
started for the paddocks which I had not yet visited.

"'Selina, I'm plannin' a desperate deed!' said Becky, in a whisper, as
we passed down the shady lane that led to the stables and pastures.

"I looked at her in surprise, for her tone was shaky.

"'I have not introduced you to Imp. Imp is the most valuable horse on
the place and would bring a high price in Nashville. My only relief is
that no one can ride him, manage, or harness him but Tim and me. When
Imp was born Tim was there, and when Imp's mother died soon after his
birth, she turned her eyes on Tim and seemed to ask him to look after
her baby. I got there just as she turned back her head and saw me. I
took her head upon my lap and promised that I would adopt her boy, and I
always felt that she knew what I said and died happier for it. From that
minute, I took charge of Imp and fed him on a bottle until he could eat
alone. Tim and I have had sole charge of his training, but he is surely
an Imp when anyone else tries to come near him.' Becky almost wept as
she told me the story of the poor mother-mare.

"'Imp understands everything one says to him, but he can't talk;
however, his eyes tell you what he wishes to say! Now, if any stranger
should raid the stables and spy Imp, they would certainly try to steal
him first, for he is the finest thoroughbred that ever stepped over
Tennessee soil! But, he will bite, and kick, and bolt with anyone who
dares to trifle with him. Then do you know what will happen? They'll
either put a bullet through his heart, or hitch him to an army
ambulance, which will break his heart just the same.'

"Rebecca walked along in silence after that, until we reached a stile
that divided the house lands from the pastures.

"'Selina, there's only one thing to do--take him away and hide him until
this war is over. From what I gather from the servants about the place,
this plantation is in a straight line for Nashville, the point the
Yankees are making for. So, the sooner Imp is hidden the better!'

"'Becky,' asked I, in alarm, 'will these slaves desert or sell you out
to the Yankees?'

"'Mercy, no, Selina! They are like children to us. It may be that one
or two would like the novelty of going North, but they would soon be
squelched if it was found out. Why, father and mother treat their old
slaves like their family--asking advice of Tim, or Martha the
housekeeper, as the case might be. As for our old mammy--and the
cook--gracious, Selina! I'd die for either one of them, and so would any
one of us, and they know it. They'd stick to us even if we lost this
war--which we won't!' cried Rebecca.

"I felt somewhat piqued, but said nothing, for I was a guest of
Rebecca's. She sensed that she had said something difficult to forget,
and hugged me laughingly.

"'You wouldn't give a fig for a friend that could hope anything but
success for her country, would you?' she asked.

"I made no reply, and she continued in a low voice.

"'Selina, I'm going to take you into a secret that no one but Tim and
father knows about. Father hasn't an idea that I know about it, and Tim
won't tell him that I know. I found it myself years ago, and I always go
there when I want to be all alone. I have driven Imp right through and
he knows the cave and has no fear of the water, now.'

"I listened in surprise to the words but knew nothing of what she meant.

"After we had walked about a mile down the lane, Becky turned off across
the field. We came to a lovely little patch of woods where I could hear
the roar of a rushing stream. Rebecca led me by crooked paths until we
came to the brink of this torrent where it tumbled over a ledge of rock
about twenty feet high, and made a most beautiful waterfall. The
current was so swift above the falls that the water shot over making an
arch as it fell. The steep banks at either side were mossy and tall
ferns almost covered them.

"Rebecca led me straight to the falls. I hesitated as I saw her take a
step toward the back-rock under the falls and suddenly disappear in the
spray, calling upon me to follow.

"I was sure she knew what she was doing, so I too went headlong into the
spray to find myself behind the arched falls on a huge flat rock which
lay before a deep crevice opening straight into the cliff. Not a drop of
water penetrated here, but the spray made a thick curtain between the
cave and the outer world.

"Rebecca led me by the hand along a tunnel, and, after we had gone about
twenty feet, it opened into a high-vaulted cavern. Soon Rebecca found
the lantern and lighted it. I looked about in surprise; the place was
quite comfortably furnished with a chair, a rough table and a mattress
with bedding upon it.

"'I made Tim carry these things over here from the store-room and made
him swear never to tell father. Tim is almost seventy years old and he
believes in an oath as firmly as he does in Heaven. As far as I know,
Tim and Daddy are the only ones beside myself who know of this cave. The
reason I am bringing you here--a Yankee, too--is because I feel in my
bones that you will have to help me in some danger or need. Here is
where Imp is going to be hidden and I shall have to see if I can get him
to make friends with you, for you may have to claim him some day and
take him North with you.'

"'Oh, Becky, don't talk like this! You frighten me! I wish you were all
at Happy Hills with me where you would be safe.'

"'Do you think that one of us would seek another safer home while we
are needed here?' asked Rebecca, sternly.

"I made no reply and Rebecca carried the lantern ahead, bidding me
follow her out. We reached the extreme end of the cave, when Rebecca
handed me the lantern to hold down close to some lichen. I did so and
found that the mass of roots and moss that hung there swayed slowly back
and forth in a current of air. This, then, was the cause of the cave
being so well ventilated. Becky stooped, pushed aside the mossy curtain
and crawled into a small tunnel, taking the lantern from me after she
had entered.

"I followed close behind, upon hands and knees, through an opening the
size of a bushel basket. Finally, we reached a wider opening where we
could stand upon our feet again. We crept through this queer tunnel for
a long time and then I felt that we were ascending gradually and that
the air was growing purer. In a few moments more, we emerged from
another narrow crevice hidden under the gnarled roots of a live-oak.
Moss, lichen and fern covered this opening so completely that no one
would have dreamed there was an entrance there to a secret cave.

"We were in a grassy dell hemmed in by a thin ribbon of woods which
ended in a grove of tall pines upon a knoll.

"Rebecca extinguished the light and led me toward this grove. She
selected an old veteran pine and climbed up into its wide branches until
a comfortable notch was reached. I did likewise. As we sat there
admiring the wonderful view of distant mountains, Rebecca clutched my
arm, and pointed with one hand toward the low range of mountains about
fifty miles away.

"I looked and saw a heavy cloud of smoke hanging low over the crests. At
intervals we heard the echo of a 'boom.'

"'Oh, Selina, there's no time to lose, now! The fighting is so near that
we can hear the cannon over the mountain!'

"'What shall we do?' I cried helplessly.

"'Do!' almost screamed Rebecca, as she tore her clothes on the pine
boughs in her rapid descent. 'Why, I'll run Imp down to the cave, while
you race to the house and tell Timothy the news. Order him to bring
oats, bedding, blankets, and whatever Imp might need for a long siege.
Tell him you know the secret and will help me take care of Imp. Then, on
to the house, warning the negroes as you go, and tell the folks at the
house. If they ask how we know, answer that we were on the ridge and saw
it. Don't tell them that we were in the pine tree!'

"Calling these hurried directions as she went, Becky ran back through
the glade until we reached the woods near the lane. She pointed toward
the house, which could be seen in the distant haze, then ran for the
shed where Imp was kept.

"I did as I was ordered, wondering all the way why I was placed in such
an undesirable position--a Northerner plotting, as it were, against my
own people. I cared little about the war at that time, for I knew
nothing of war or its toll.

"However, I reached the outer buildings where the slaves lived and my
news acted like an electric current upon the inmates. Immediately they
ran in different directions, seemingly bent upon doing a part of a work
that had been carefully planned and arranged. I found out later, that
such was the case. The older slaves, who were trusted implicitly, set
to work burying (as I supposed) whatever fruit, vegetables, smoked
meats, and other edibles they could find--in fact, everything stored in
cellars or store-rooms.

"I was curious to see how they could prevent the articles from coming in
contact with the soil, and found that a chain of bricked cellars had
been built a short time before, and the bushes and weeds carefully
replaced on the dirt that covered the roofs. A door, opening into the
first of the chain of cellars, was made in a steep bank of earth. It was
merely a large hole in the ground covered with a flat stone that turned
upon a pivot. About this spot the soil and grass had been very cleverly
arranged to conceal any sign of what lay beneath.

"By afternoon not a piece of extra linen, bedding, or silver could be
found about the house. The jewelry, valuable bits of art and pictures,
heirlooms and a valuable library, had disappeared as if by magic. I knew
it had all been placed in some safe place and felt relieved at the
knowledge.

"I wandered about feeling lonesome for Rebecca and wishing I might
assist Tim who seemed busy in some undertaking. I watched him tie down
a canvas covering over a loaded cart and caught his glance, which seemed
to beckon me. I walked over to the mule's side and patted its head while
Tim spoke.

"'Miss Becky, she say you'se come wif me. I'se got'ter take dis load
down to der paddock!' Tim looked about as he spoke and winked at me
knowingly.

"I walked beside him as he drove the mule along the lane. The cart
seemed laden and the mule walked slowly, but we reached the wall that
divided the gardens from the farm, and then Tim made the beast go as
fast as possible, all the while looking covertly about for a run-away
negro or a Yankee scout.

"I suspected where we were going, and, sure enough! As we reached the
woods by the lane, Rebecca called softly, 'No further, Tim!' and came
out with several huge market baskets.

"Tim tied the mule to a tree by the roadside and removed the canvas
covering. There was everything one would need for light housekeeping for
several weeks. Besides the food and clothing, there were bandages,
medicine, bedding, lanterns, an oil-stove, dishes, and numerous other
necessities. These were piled in the baskets and carried to the cave
where they were placed in crannies for some future emergency.

"'Imp, I want you to be introduced to my best friend,' said Rebecca,
after we had brought in our first basket.

"I heard a whinny and looked about in the gloom.

"Rebecca went over to a corner near the spot whence fresh air entered
the cavern, and held the lantern up for me to see her pet.

"I stood making friendly advances to the beauty and, to Becky's
amazement, he never moved an inch, but wrinkled his nose for sugar.

"'Witch! that is what you are!' laughed Becky, as Imp poked his nose
under my arm. 'I have never known him to do such a thing.'

"Imp stood listening to his mistress as if he thoroughly understood the
situation.

"I turned to tell Rebecca what a beauty he was, and he deliberately
poked his nose out against my face.

"After all the supplies were stacked away, Rebecca slipped the halter
over Imp's head and led him to a ring cemented in the solid rock.

"'Now, Imp, you will have to be good and not whinny or make a sound. I
know what is good for you, and you must do just as I tell you, or a bad
Yankee soldier will catch you and then you will see!' warned Rebecca,
shaking her finger at him.

"The horse stood looking at her as if striving to understand what that
strange word 'Yankee' meant; then he threw up his head and shook it
defiantly.

"We said good-by to Imp and returned to the cart where Tim waited. We
sent Tim to the barns with the mule and we went back to the house.

"That was such a busy day that everyone felt weary and glad when the sun
showed its slanting rays over the trees. It must have been about four
o'clock when sounds of approaching cavalry reached the house. It was the
company Newell and his brother had formed a few months before. They had
been driven over the mountainside and decided to spend the night in
hiding at home.

"The sewing room was filled with neighbors whose boys were members of
the company, so you can imagine the joy of seeing them again.

"The boys were covered with mire halfway to the waist, and their horses
looked as if they must drop where they stood. Many of the soldiers were
hatless, powder smirched, and, oh, so tired!

"Rebecca took me to her room and locked the door.

"'Selina, did you see that tall dark officer--the one that kept smiling
at us? Well, he is my best friend, and I want you to fall in love with
him. He knows all about you and I showed him your picture a long time
ago, so he knows you quite well, you see.'

"I laughed merrily at Becky's match-making.

"'Oh,' she sighed, as her thought rushed to something else. 'Wasn't it
just like Providence that we got Imp and all of those supplies hidden
away in time?'

"'Yes, but it is not necessary with the rebels in command of the place,'
I said, using the term 'rebel' quite unconsciously, for the first time.

"Rebecca noticed it, too, but said nothing at the time.

"'Well, I showed you just how to get in and out of that cave in case you
are the only one who can take care of Imp. One never knows what may
happen, but you, being my guest, are safe with our friends, and, being a
Yankee, will be taken care of in case the enemy take the place. But,
remember, if Imp is to be taken from me, I would rather you had him than
anyone on earth--and you must assert your ownership if necessary to take
him home with you.'

"That was a great reunion, that dinner! Besides all of the young
soldiers, their families were there, listening to their account of the
struggle.

"The happy families had finished dinner and were about to have coffee
when a colored boy raced up the steps of the piazza. His face was gray
with fear as he gasped, 'De Yanks am comin'--oh, dey am comin' pell mell
foh dis house! oh, Lud, Lud!'

"'Tell all the folks, Jeremiah, quick!' shouted Becky, as she sprang
forward to warn her friends.

"'The horses--quick, Tim! The horses--rush them to the house!' yelled
Newell, as he grabbed his gun and threw on his cap.

"'Mother, good-by,' cried Ed, as he caught a kiss from her lips, and
Newell hurriedly did the same.

"The next minute all was confusion as the soldier boys jumped into the
saddle, while still buckling on knapsacks and ammunition belts.

"Five minutes after Jeremiah had given the alarm, the boys were lost in
a cloud of dust galloping on the way to Nashville. But not soon enough!"

Here, Aunt Selina leaned back in her chair and looked away over the
lawns as if she saw again the scurrying horses racing for dear life in
one direction, while from the opposite direction she saw another picture
she had not yet mentioned.

"If you are wearied, Aunt Selina, we will postpone the story for another
day," suggested Mrs. Talmage.

"Oh, no! please don't!" begged the excited children.

"Oh, Flutey, I simply couldn't wait until to-morrow to find out what
happened," cried Ruth, beseechingly.

Aunt Selina smiled at the children, and Uncle Ben added: "They are
right! I don't want to wait either!"

"Really! is it as good as that?"

"Good! I should say it is! It's a big 'seller' if it was only in a
book!" returned Uncle Ben.

"Well, then, after the magazine is done with it suppose we sell it to a
publisher for the benefit of the children," ventured Aunt Selina,
eagerly.

"Fine idea! We will try it!" said Uncle Ben.

Aunt Selina moved her chair to keep the rays of the setting sun from her
eyes, and then continued with her story.




CHAPTER IX

HOW THE YANKEES TOOK POSSESSION


"I think the rest of this story is the most interesting of all,"
murmured Aunt Selina, as she permitted her memory to roam in years long
gone.

The children waited patiently for Aunt Selina to begin and, after a
short moment, she sat up erect, looking fearfully out over the lawn, and
spoke hurriedly.

"Right there before our very eyes we saw the Yankee regiment tear down
the lane and swerve toward the road just taken by the Southern boys.
They were still to be seen making for the woods just over the slope of
the hill toward Nashville.

"We heard the captain shout, 'Halt! Aim! Fire!' and, as a volley rang
out, many of the ladies on the piazza screamed or fainted, while Rebecca
and I stood petrified at the result of that happy dinner.

"Almost at the same time the Yankees fired there came the rattle of
musketry from the woods which the boys had reached.

"From the veranda I saw several of the Yankees' horses leap up and two
of them rolled over on the ground. One man threw up his hands, fell over
on his horse's neck, and dropped his gun. The horse, frightened, started
galloping directly toward the house. Tim, who was coming down the side
steps, ran forward and caught hold of the bridle. Mr. Crudup and some of
his friends lifted the young soldier from the saddle and carefully
carried him up the piazza steps, and placed him on the floor.

"While much of my attention was distracted by this incident, the company
of Yankees spurred their horses on toward the patch of woods where the
Southerners were hidden.

"The firing continued for half an hour, while everyone at the house
waited, fearing the worst and hoping against hope that their boys had
gotten away to Nashville.

"Rebecca's two brothers, cousins and old friends were all in that
handful of men, and naturally those gathered at the house would wait
until the outcome of the skirmish could be known.

"They had not long to wait, for, just as twilight deepened into night,
the negroes came in with the report that all of the boys had been
captured and were being taken as prisoners to the old school-house. In
another half-hour the officers rode up to the door, followed by
orderlies and an ambulance corps bringing in the wounded. Slaves were
dispatched here and there for hot water, bandages, beds, bedding and
medicine. We all hastened to prepare a place for those who needed our
care and attention so sorely.

"As the wounded were carried up the steps and past the neighbors, who
stood by watching for their own, Rebecca's mother saw her youngest boy
lying unconscious with his face white as death and his hair matted with
blood that oozed from a wound in his neck. She almost fainted, but
Rebecca held her firm, saying, 'Mother, now is the time to brace up and
take care of Newell that he may soon recover.'

"Of the Yankees, one was killed outright and five badly wounded, while
the Southern boys sustained more serious injuries. Two were killed and
nine wounded. The house was immediately turned into a hospital, both
sides receiving the same attention.

"The officers were very considerate but insisted upon having their
rights observed. When it was found that some foraging parties were in
the neighborhood, the captain sent an orderly to say that the Crudup
Plantation was well supplied. The Yankees, receiving the message, rode
over, took what was needed, food, cattle and horses, and went away.

"Mr. Crudup spared his family the harrowing details of the raid, but
looked upon it as the fortune of war and thanked heaven that so much of
his property was safely buried.

"When the store-rooms, linen-presses, blanket-trunks, and cellars were
found almost empty, the officer in charged looked surprised and wondered
aloud.

"'Most unusual to find so large an establishment short of all supplies,
and a retinue of servants to feed, to say nothing of the droves of
neighbors always coming in for supper.'

"Mr. Crudup overheard the soliloquy and replied courteously.

"'Sir, do not forget that your company is not the first to stop here
and demand my hospitality. Naturally, we would lavish our all upon our
own men, you know.'

"The officers were very polite and interesting young men, but Rebecca
and I had to go about the plantation very warily, for we never knew when
we might be spied upon. Imp had to be cared for daily, so we found
plenty of amusement in eluding the Yankees.

"The youngest of the officers was a handsome boy and it was not long
before we became very friendly. When he learned that I was a Yankee and
how I happened to be South, he insisted upon my returning home at once,
saying that the neighborhood about Nashville soon would be an impossible
place to live.

"When he found that my home was at Happy Hills he was greatly pleased.

"'Why, I have called at your home many times; my sister and yours are
school friends.' He described his home and how his sister looked when
she came to visit us, and I faintly recalled seeing him with the others
who were some years my senior.

"From that day he became the sworn ally of Rebecca and myself. He
understood there was a secret between us and often managed to screen us
when we left the house to creep to the cavern to look after Imp.

"The wounded were getting along beautifully, and nothing exciting had
occurred for a fortnight. Foraging parties that stopped at the house and
found Yankees in possession moved on. It seemed more like a house-party.

"But a change soon took place.

"It was afterward learned that Ed Crudup escaped during the transfer of
the prisoners from the school-house to the army; he found out from some
of the Crudup slaves that the Yankees who shot his brother and
imprisoned himself were holding the premises until further orders from
Headquarters. So he raised a small company at Nashville and drilled them
for a few days, planning to surprise the men at the house and take them
prisoners.

"One day, while some of the Yankees were out foraging, Ed and his men
came upon them suddenly and a skirmish ensued.

"Ed was shot down and so was our young officer who was in command of the
foragers that day. The others fought like madmen, hand to hand, until
the men at the house, hearing the shots, ran out to their assistance.

"The Southerners, outnumbered, took flight, but were pursued and
captured.

"The two men, Ed and Vernon, lay still as death in the tall grass, and
no one missed them at the time of the pursuit.

"Tim, however, on his way to water Imp, found his young master shot
through the heart, and the young Yankee unconscious. In his faithful
loyalty to the family, he decided to make a prisoner of the Yankee, so
he dragged Vernon over to the waterfall, carried him through the spray,
and laid him down on the mattress in the cave. The cold water which had
fallen upon Vernon's face had partially revived him, and he moaned as if
in pain.

"Tim lighted the lantern and examined him. He found a clean bullet hole
in his chest, but very little bleeding. He decided the best thing to do
would be to notify the master. So, after attending to Imp, he crept out
of the cave and went over to the remains of the young master. He managed
to carry him until he met some of the slaves, then had them improvise a
stretcher to carry the body to the house.

"There was great sorrow in the household, and his death changed the
attitude of the Crudups toward the Yankee officers.

"When it was found that young Vernon was missing, with no trace of him
anywhere, it was thought that he had been taken captive by a few of the
Confederates who got away. Rebecca and I felt dreadfully lonesome after
our friend was missing, and I wished, for the first time since I came
South, that I could go home.

"Then one morning, Rebecca and I decided to go through the hole in the
live-oak tree and crawl to the cave to see Imp. We had not dared to
visit him for some days, as a Yankee sentry was stationed in the woods
by the waterfall.

"Rebecca hid a small lantern under her cloak and we strolled
unconcernedly down the lane toward the dell. We looked carefully about
to make sure no spies were watching, and in another minute both of us
disappeared. We groped along until we reached the opening into the cave
and as we crawled out near Imp's bed, he greeted us with a joyful
whinny. Rebecca ran over and placed her hand over his mouth, so she did
not see the apparition that stared at me from the mattress. Had I held
the lantern I would have dropped it. As it was, I almost dropped myself,
so frightened was I.

"I clutched Rebecca's arm and she turned about to see what ailed me. In
a second she recognized Vernon and ran over with the lantern. As he
could not tell us how he came there, but confided that Tim and Mr.
Crudup came daily to attend to him, we learned that they knew of his
whereabouts. Rebecca snapped her teeth close and her eyes blazed at the
thought of her father keeping this man a prisoner in such a suffocating
place.

"While we were there, Tim and Mr. Crudup crept through the tunnel and
found us talking to the sick man.

"'Becky, better leave this business to us,' suggested Mr. Crudup.

"'Father, how could you keep this man in such a place?' cried Rebecca,
unguardedly.

"'Ssh!' warned Tim, apprehensively.

"Mr. Crudup told Rebecca how Tim had carried Vernon here to square
accounts for Ed's death; how he had shown Tim the folly of the deed,
and that being done, it had to be made the best of, or disclose the
secret of the cave. Tim was so repentant that he agreed to remain in the
cave and nurse the prisoner.

"After our discovery, Rebecca spent several hours with Vernon each day
reading or talking to him, while Imp began to show his fondness for
Vernon in every way a horse can.

"Matters at the house became troublesome, for the larder was empty, and
there was no way to get at the great store-rooms dug out of the ground
without letting the Yankees into the secret.

"Tim had been very meek since he found the serious blunder he had made
with Vernon, and he was eager to make amends in any way.

"From the time that Tim heard of the threatened famine he was seldom
seen about the place. Now and then, one of the family would meet him
coming from the basement with his face and hands smeared with black, but
he never confided in anyone as to his work or whereabouts, and being an
aged favored man, Mr. Crudup never questioned him.

"One morning the cook entered the room where the family was gathered
and announced: 'There ain't no aigs fer brekfus.'

"'Have plain ham or bacon,' suggested Mrs. Crudup.

"'De ham an' bacon done all et up, too,' said cook.

"Mrs. Crudup looked deeply concerned, but said: 'Then we'll have just
coffee and muffins.'

"'Done used all de flour yistiddy--not a smitch lef'.'

"Here, indeed, was a quandary! Nothing to eat!

"This was Tim's opportunity.

"He came in, bowed with old hat in his hand, and turned to the cook with
the request, 'You please 'scuse yo-se'f fum de room whiles I conflab wid
de missus?'

"Cook tossed her head and went out, followed by everyone except Mr. and
Mrs. Crudup.

"Tim turned his hat about in his hands for a time and then looked up
smilingly and said: 'I done squared myself wid you all fer makin' dat
blunner 'bout the Yank. I done gone and dug a tunnel fru fum de coal
cellah to the fust storehouse on de fiel'. I fixed a doh to the cellar
an' heah's de key to de padlock.'

"'You what!' exclaimed Mr. Crudup, in amazement.

"'Yas'm, das whad I did!' said Tim.

"Mr. Crudup threw back his head and laughed while he slapped Tim on the
back and said, 'Tim, it will take more than a company of Yankees to
starve us out while you are about!'

"But Mrs. Crudup took Tim's hand and thanked him with tears in her eyes.

"The supply question was easily solved after that. No one but Tim knew
where the tunnel was, for Mr. Crudup never allowed anyone to be about
when the old servant started his daily trip to the underground
store-rooms. Oftentimes, the officers expressed their wonder as to how
Southern cooks could manage the way they did, with so little on hand to
cook with. If they suspected the truth they never hinted at it.

"The secret of Vernon's prison had been kept, and several weeks after
the fight that disabled him, his company was ordered to join the main
army. The moment the place was entirely freed from the Yankees, Mr.
Crudup ordered one of the guest-rooms prepared, and, to the surprise of
Mrs. Crudup, told her he had a prisoner to bring in. That night Vernon
was blindfolded, placed upon a stretcher, and taken to the house.

"As soon as he could sit up and come down upon the veranda, we wondered
what to do with him. He was our prisoner but we had no use for him.
Everyone liked him and disliked sending him to the dirty barrack-jail in
Nashville.

"Suddenly Rebecca was inspired with a brilliant plan.

"When the Yankee officers left the place they took the convalescent
prisoners with them. Now Rebecca suggested that negotiations be started
to exchange Vernon for Newell.

"Mr. Crudup immediately sent Tim to Nashville to see if this could be
done, and friends there promised to attend to it without delay.
Consequently, in a few days, a number of soldiers from Nashville rode to
the Crudup house and carried away the prisoner, giving Mrs. Crudup the
slip of paper that stated that Newell's freedom would be granted upon
the return of Vernon.

"We all felt sorry about losing Vernon, but he promised to visit me at
Happy Hills when the war was over."

Aunt Selina stopped and the children began plying questions.

"Aunt Selina, what became of Imp?" asked Dot.

"We kept him in the cave for a few days more, and then, one morning, the
negroes all turned green with fear when they saw Rebecca riding Imp down
the road from the paddock, for they believed Imp to have been taken with
the other horses, and were sure that this was a ghost of the real Imp."
And Aunt Selina laughed as she recalled Rebecca's mad ride down the lane
and the high wall Imp vaulted before he stopped stock still in front of
the quaking, superstitious slaves.

"Did Newell come back home?" asked Betty, whose sympathy was all for the
mother who lost one boy and then had the other one taken prisoner.

"We received word of his transfer from the Yankee army to his own. He
went into active service again and fought all through the rest of the
war. He won many honors for bravery before the Confederate Army was
disbanded."

"Do you know what became of him afterwards?" asked Don, interested in
such a fighter.

"He married and settled out West upon a large ranch. Now and then
Rebecca's daughter has a letter from him, giving news of his children or
the grandchildren."

"Oh, then, Rebecca married too. Did you know who it was?" asked several
curious voices.

"Yes," smiled Aunt Selina. "She married the very beau she had selected
for me."

"I am so anxious to know if that fine old house is still there and if we
could find the cave and underground store-rooms if we ever went there?"
asked Norma.

"No, dear; the beautiful old mansion was entirely destroyed by fire
started from a shell during the time the battle line closed about
Nashville. I was not there at the time, but Rebecca wrote and told me of
the dreadful scenes. Almost every family for miles about was left
homeless and destitute. The Pines, Rebecca's home, stood as long as any
and sheltered every homeless Southerner round about."

"I guess Rebecca liked to remember that, didn't she?" said Ruth.

"Yes, indeed, Fluff."

"Aunt Selina, you didn't tell us what became of Imp and Rebecca that
day she rode up to the house," reminded Ned.

"Rebecca laughed at the servants' fear and rode Imp over to the steps of
the piazza. We stood watching her as she jumped off and led Imp right up
to the rail. 'Lady,' said she to me, 'this horse just told me that he
was going North on a little visit. As there is no one here but you who
can take him there, I believe he intends taking you home.' Although
Rebecca's eyes filled with tears and her voice trembled, we all laughed
and made a great fuss over Imp.

"Later, she confided to me that she had entrusted Vernon with the
request to secure a passport for Selina Talmage and her horse, Imp,
going home to Happy Hills, Pennsylvania. The passport came that day in a
letter for Rebecca explaining how I was to go and to whom I was to
entrust myself. A note for me was inclosed in the letter, and I read it
with a smile. Vernon said he would demand payment for the favor given me
as soon as he reached Happy Hills. Rebecca teased me about that note and
said that she knew what the favor would be, for Vernon was in love with
me. I pooh-poohed the suggestion but felt very glad to pack my clothes
for home. In a few days word came that I was to ride to a certain town
where an escort would meet me and conduct me to the nearest railroad.
And so Imp and I went home."

"And now tell us, Aunt Selina, did Vernon come home and ask that favor?"
wondered Norma, interested in a love-story.

"Oh, yes! He had leave of absence for several months to fully recover
from the wound that had partially punctured a lung. He used to ride over
to Happy Hills every day, and I tell you we missed him when he returned
to his regiment."

"Where is he now, Aunt Selina?" asked Ruth.

"Gone--his name is carved on the monument at Washington for bravery in
the Battle of Bull Run," whispered Aunt Selina.

"Oh, oh, Aunt Selina! Is _he_ the same one you told me about last
spring?" gasped Ruth.

Aunt Selina dabbed her tear-moistened eyes and tried to smile as she
said, "The same, Honey."

"What's that--tell us, Aunt Selina; we never heard about it," cried
several children.

"Well, Vernon came back North about a year after his leave of absence
expired with important letters for a general in Philadelphia. After
delivering the letters he was to have two days' leave in which to go
home and see his folks. He rode over to our house one evening and asked
my father and mother if he might pay court to me when the war was over.
My parents were delighted, for they knew him and liked him. Vernon and I
walked out to the very summer house that Ruth was in when she thought of
the farm plan, and there he told me what he had said to my parents. He
would not bind me, for he said he might never come back. But I said it
would make no difference to me--if he never returned I would wait just
the same. We exchanged rings--one which had been given me for my
birthday and one he had received on his twenty-first birthday. When he
left that night mother gave him a paper, but I never knew what was in it
until later. When news of his bravery and death came home, the letter
contained a ring and a small daguerreotype picture of me. Then mother
said he had asked for it the night he went away."

"Oh, Aunt Selina, how lovely of you!" cried several little girls as
they crowded about the old lady and hugged her.

"Rebecca did not return to school again, but as soon as the war was over
we wrote and invited Mr. and Mrs. Crudup to bring Rebecca North to visit
us. The elders were too heart-sore to come to a country they blamed for
all their losses, but Rebecca came and stayed a long time."




CHAPTER X

BEGINNING TO SPELL SUCCESS


Another nest of Blue Birds had been formed under Mrs. Catlin's
supervision, and these little girls were chosen to act as agents to
secure subscriptions for the forthcoming magazine. They were also
permitted to donate short stories or pictures to the magazine and, being
so young a branch of the first Nest, felt this was a special privilege.

Aunt Selina had written her interesting Civil War story and had it ready
for Uncle Ben, but Mrs. Catlin was still busy trying to arrange her
chapters so they would make a good serial.

The Blue Birds had written their pages over and over, and finally Mrs.
Talmage said they would lose all sense in the telling if they kept on
rewriting. So the pages were taken as they were and corrected by Uncle
Ben.

As the various short articles came in to the Publishing House, Mrs.
Talmage took charge of them. Many a pleased surprise she had as she
read the different articles submitted by the boys, and the suggestions
and hints sent in by the girls.

The Bobolinks spent every afternoon at their Publishing House, setting
type, trying to run machines, and find out various things about
business. The two young men promised by Uncle Ben were not expected
until actual work on the magazine began.

So much talk had been heard at various dinner-tables in Oakdale, that
fathers manifested enough curiosity in the work to ask for an invitation
to the Publishing House. The habit of "dropping in to watch the boys"
grew to be regular meetings, and the men enjoyed the social evenings as
much as the boys did. Naturally, the work did not lose any of its value
by the suggestions and ideas given by the older, experienced business
men, but the Blue Birds grew envious over the evident interest shown in
the Bobolinks while they were never about.

One afternoon the Blue Birds gathered about Mrs. Talmage with a
complaint.

"Mother Wings, those Bobolinks will be 'way ahead of us in this fun,
unless you get the mothers to meet once in a while to suggest things for
us to do," said Ruth, dolefully.

"And from something I heard Don tell Mete, those fathers have promised
to help the Bobolinks do the _work_, too!" broke in Dot Starr.

"Since Ned has moved his printing stuff to the carriage house his den is
vacant--we might use that for our Winter Nest, until we find something
better," suggested Mrs. Starr, after thinking seriously of what had just
been said.

"That will be all right, but it won't boost our work like the boys are
being boosted," fretted Norma.

"I shall have to think of it," replied Mrs. Talmage, deeply concerned
over the discontent of the Blue Birds; but Aunt Selina, who had been a
silent listener of the complaint, spoke.

"Are those Bobolinks and the men actually helping the success of the
magazine?"

"No, not that we can see; they just use paper and fool away every
evening running those machines," snapped Dot, who generally heard all
the doings from her brothers.

"Then they are not getting ahead so fast with success as you seem to
think," replied Aunt Selina, calmly. "The principal things in making a
magazine pay are its circulation and the advertising contracts. If these
are not being thought of and tried, the Bobolinks are wasting their
precious time."

"But they are so well acquainted with the machines that they say they
can print anything!" said Dot.

"All right, suppose we take them at their word and ask them to give us
proof of some circulars," laughed Mrs. Talmage.

"I suppose they would, but where would we use them?" asked Norma.

"This is what I would suggest--we'll play the game of the 'Tortoise and
the Hare,' and they'll be left asleep at their work while we win the
race," declared Aunt Selina.

The Blue Birds gathered closer to Aunt Selina's chair, and she continued
her instruction.

"We'll have Mother Wings write a letter and ask Mr. Wells to bring down
that Institution Book he promised us, as we wish to use it at once. Then
we'll count up the number of institutions where we could send a magazine
and circular. Some of these will subscribe most likely, while the
circular letter will reach the hands of some of the wealthy patrons of
the Homes. We'll compose a letter and order those Bobolinks to print ten
thousand for us. I guess that will keep them busy for a time and at the
same time make them wonder what _we_ are doing without their knowledge
or consent."

"Shall we mail the letters when they are printed?" asked Betty.

"No, I thought we could address large-sized envelopes with the names of
the institutions and as soon as the magazines are printed we can place a
letter and a magazine in each envelope. Of course, we inclose a
subscription blank, too; this work of folding and sealing the letters
and magazines is where we will invite the mothers to help. After that we
can send out some samples to other folks, but we will make the Bobolinks
wonder why the mothers are here so often."

The Blue Birds laughed and thought the plan very good, and Dot Starr
added, "We're surely glad you're here, Aunt Selina."

"And we will keep all of our papers and work in the den and no one will
see what is being done," added Mrs. Talmage.

"You must keep the key, Mother Wings," advised Ruth.

The letter for Mr. Wells was written without delay, for Norma was to
hand it to her father that evening. After this was finished the
important work of composing a letter for folks who would receive the
magazine was started.

This letter provoked many suggestions and criticisms, but finally was
concluded and read aloud to the children, who declared it just right.

"But we haven't a bit of paper for the printing," exclaimed Ruth.

"Maybe Aunt Selina and I can go to the paper mills in the morning and
see if they have any small lot that will do," suggested Mrs. Talmage.

This offer cheered the Blue Birds again, as a few hours' delay would not
matter very much.

"Now, that's done, what next?" asked Dot.

"Next thing is to say 'good-afternoon' and go home," laughed Mrs.
Talmage, looking at her watch.

"Oh, dear, mother, it cannot be dinner-time," said Ruth.

"It is almost six o'clock, and I have some matters to look after,
dear," returned her mother.

"Well, we can invite our mothers to join us, anyway, can't we, Mrs.
Talmage?" said May.

"Yes, but I wouldn't mention the fact that we feel that we must have
them to enable us to get ahead of the Bobolinks, for your fathers will
hear of it and plan some way to win out in spite of us," advised the
astute Aunt Selina.

"We won't! We'll just say that as long as the boys have their fathers
with them, we girls are going to invite our mothers," explained Norma,
while the others nodded approval.

"May we come to-night?" asked Betty.

"How about school lessons?" asked Mrs. Talmage.

"And I want to revise several parts of my story to-night, besides the
paper mills have not yet been visited, you know," objected Aunt Selina.

"Girls, we'd better wait until to-morrow; that's Friday and we won't
have to go to bed so early as other evenings," suggested Ruth.

"All right, we'll meet in the den to-morrow afternoon and report how
many mothers will be here," consented Dot.

"And I'll have Mrs. Catlin here in the evening," added Mrs. Talmage.

"Mother Wings, if we use that old room of Ned's, why couldn't we call it
our Winter Nest? We can move in our cherry-tree Nest furniture when it
grows colder and make the room look real comfy," said Ruth.

The other Blue Birds approved of the suggestion and Mrs. Talmage said
she had no objection to having the Winter Nest in the den, so it was
decided then and there.

Ruth accompanied her friends to the steps and as they stood vainly
wishing there were several extra hours to add to an afternoon, Dot saw
Don jump out of the wide-open door of the Publishing House and laugh
derisively at someone inside.

"Now I wonder what that boy is up to?" she said.

"Oh, say, wouldn't it be fun to creep in back of the carriage house and
peep in at the windows to watch the boys!" suggested Edith.

"I know a better way," answered Ruth. "We will ask Ike to let us go up
in the loft from the small room and we can look down through the wide
chinks of the floor."

"Oh, do let's!" cried the Blue Birds, as they hurried back of the house
to steal noiselessly over to the garage.

Ike understood the rivalry growing between them, and decided to be
perfectly impartial, so he unlocked the door of the small room where the
stairs led to a loft over the Publishing House.

The Bobolinks were making such a noise that they never heard the
creaking of the floor overhead, or the giggles of the girls as they
glued their eyes to the crevices between the boards.

"Now it's Tuck's turn to be an advertising solicitor!" called Don, who
evidently had been discharged from some make-believe service when he was
so unexpectedly put out of the door.

"Ah, I'd never make a solicitor of any kind," grumbled Tuck Stevens.

"But you've got to play the game as we all promised," coaxed some of the
boys.

"I'll be the man you want to see," persuaded Jinks.

"Come on, Tuck. We'll have to go home pretty soon, so get busy,"
commanded Ned.

The girls began to understand that the Bobolinks were not playing, but
practicing their duty for the future, so they silently looked at each
other and nodded understandingly.

"Here goes, then," ventured Tuck, bravely.

He strutted across the floor toward the office and met one of the boys
stationed there.

"Good-morning, sir; do you wish to see anyone?" asked the impromptu
clerk.

"I have an appointment with Mr. Slamhim," quivered Tuck, as if the visit
was an actual affair.

The boys tittered with glee as Tuck turned red and white.

"Your name, please?" asked the polite clerk.

"Reuben Stevens," replied Tuck, in a whisper.

"Ha! the name'll queer you, Tuck!" laughed Don, behind his chum's back,
but the older boys hushed Don.

The clerk rapped upon the office door and a voice said, "Come in."

"Reuben Stevens to see you, sir. He has an appointment."

"Show him in," said the voice which Ruth recognized as a disguised bass
of Ned's.

Tuck walked to the office and then turned about and asked the other
boys: "Now, what shall I say--I've forgotten."

Immediately there was a loud chorus of laughter, and a scuffle and Tuck
was ousted in the same manner that Don had been.

"Didn't I say that name would spoil you?" teased Don.

"Next!" called one of the boys who had a list of names which he marked
down "good, indifferent, bad."

The boy whose turn came next carried off the rehearsal as if he had been
a solicitor all of his short life. The other boys cheered his efforts
and even the Blue Birds were tempted to clap their hands.

"Well, Bobolinks, I think this will do for to-day; we have drilled three
of the boys after the manner shown us last night, but Don and Tuck seem
to be hopeless cases," said Ned.

"I'll practice it at home on Dot, and show you what I can do to-morrow,"
eagerly promised Don.

Dot looked up at her friends when she heard this and shook her head
energetically.

The Bobolinks carefully covered the machines with the canvas covers and
started to go out. At the same time the girls in the loft crept across
the floor toward the steps. The boys were not making so much noise as
when the Blue Birds went up in the loft, and Meredith stood surprised
when he heard something moving over his head.

"Where's Ike?" he whispered to Ned.

"Just outside the door--why?" replied Ned.

"Don't you hear those footsteps?"

"What--where? Yes, of course!" exclaimed Ned.

Simon was seen crossing the lawn and Ike stood outside with the boys, so
who could be upstairs?

Meantime, Ruth overheard Meredith's exclamation and hurried the girls
down and out, and pushed them inside the garage before any of the boys
could persuade Ike that someone was upstairs. Finally he allowed them to
drag him to the small carriage room and ascend the steps.

The Blue Birds lay hidden in the bottom of the automobile and almost
suffocated trying to keep from laughing outright at the way the
Bobolinks were hoodwinked.

Every one of the boys trudged up the steps, but found the loft empty. As
soon as they were out of sight in the small room, the girls jumped out
of the car and ran madly for the shrubbery which sheltered the kitchen
gardens from the lawns. Here, they could creep toward home without being
seen from the barns.

Ike looked carefully about the loft but hid a smile when his back was
turned.

"There, I told you no one was here!" he said.

"Well, I don't care, I _heard_ them!" retorted Ned.

"Maybe it was rats!" ventured Ike.

"No, sir, you said that you were never pestered with rats; besides, this
noise was just like walking would sound," insisted Ned.

Ike kept the boys upstairs arguing for a sufficient time to permit the
Blue Birds to get out of the way, then he started down.

"Well, I'll keep the door locked and the key in my room," promised Ike,
as the boys waited for him to lock up.

"If it was a tramp, Ned, he couldn't move our machinery, so what's the
use bothering?" said Don.

"He could steal our type and other things, and sell them," grumbled Ned,
still unassured.

Ruth was walking slowly up from the main gates when Ned reached the
veranda. She was stooping over a chrysanthemum blossom to note its
beautiful coloring when Ned whistled to attract her attention.

"Better hurry in and wash up for dinner--it's almost seven, and mother
doesn't like dinner delayed, you know," Ned said, as Ruth skipped up
smilingly.

Not a word was said, and the Bobolinks never found out how the Blue
Birds watched them practice their future business tactics.

The next morning Mrs. Talmage and Aunt Selina had Ike drive them to the
paper mills.

Mrs. Talmage explained her errand and selected some samples of
stationery paper. The manager then showed them over the mills and Aunt
Selina whispered aside to Mrs. Talmage: "What an interesting article
this work would make."

"Indeed, yes!" replied Mrs. Talmage, turning to the manager to tell him
of the new venture of the Blue Birds and ask him to write up a story
about the manufacture of paper.

"That I will! I like to write, and often, when I'm tired or worried, I
sit down to write a funny sketch. I have sold a number of them to Sunday
papers," was the surprising reply.

The two ladies were escorted to the manager's office and chairs were
placed for them while a price list was prepared for the convenience of
the Blue Birds.

This done, the manager sat back in his office chair.

"Have the children planned any campaign for securing circulation?" he
asked.

"Why, no, Mr. White, we intended talking that matter over with the
mothers to-night. We are all so inexperienced in this undertaking that I
suppose a business man would laugh at our way of putting 'the cart
before the horse,' as the saying is," laughed Mrs. Talmage.

"The fact is, this whole proposition is so sudden and different from
anything the children had dreamed of!" added Aunt Selina, in defence of
their mistakes.

"I know! When I heard of the daring of the children I certainly admired
their spunk, but I couldn't help shaking my head, too, for it is no
joke to start a real business, as they are doing," said Mr. White,
seriously.

"Well, we will need the help of all of our friends," smiled Mrs.
Talmage.

"You'll have it, too. Why, everybody in Oakdale felt the Blue Birds'
work last summer was wonderful; now, this new venture will have the
support of all of the townsfolks."

"It is very encouraging to hear you speak so, and if you think of any
way to boom our circulation, I wish you would come over some evening and
tell us all about it," replied Mrs. Talmage.

Suddenly the manager sat upright and looked toward the book-shelves,
which contained rows of business-like looking reference books.

"I believe we have the idea!" exclaimed he, jumping up and going over to
the shelves to take down a heavy volume.

"This book contains all the names and addresses of stationery stores in
the United States and Canada. It is only a year old, so most of these
addresses will be up-to-date. We use it for mailing samples of our
paper, but I have an idea that you would get plenty of subscriptions and
make willing agents of these storekeepers. If you send a sample of your
magazine and give them a liberal commission there is no reason why these
firms would refuse to act as agents. Anyway, it would do no harm to try
out the suggestion," said Mr. White.

"Why, Mr. White, do you know that you are a direct answer to my prayer!"
cried Aunt Selina.

"I am grateful to be favored," laughed Mr. White, "but it must be your
faith that brought the answer."

"Well, to tell the truth," continued Aunt Selina, "I am so very anxious
to have this movement of the children a fine success that I have been
praying in season and out for the way to open that we might be blessed
in this work. All we needed for the next step was a hint for
circulation."

"And I'll confide a secret, too," said Mrs. Talmage, leaning over toward
the desk. "The boys have had their fathers meet with them every evening,
advising and drilling them in ways and means to succeed, while my girls
have had to do the best they can with Aunt Selina and me. This book will
boost us far ahead of the Bobolinks and give the men who are advising a
fine surprise."

Mr. White laughed as he understood the rivalry between the two factions,
and promised to send his wife to the meetings of the mothers to convey
any advice or suggestions he might think of.

"Oh, splendid! We expect to hold our first meeting at our house
to-night. Do bring her over!" cried Mrs. Talmage.

As the three were going out to the automobile, Mr. White ventured a
remark.

"I have been told that the paper for the sample issue was to be sent
over when you wished it. Now, I thought of making an advertising
proposition to the corporation at their next meeting. If the magazine
would mention that all the paper used by them for letters, circulars and
magazines was furnished by the Oakdale Mills, it would be a good
exchange if the company donated the paper needed for the first year's
work."

The ladies stood amazed at the generous idea.

"Every paper mill in the country will try to place a contract with the
children as soon as news of this plan is out. Now, the Oakdale Mills can
secure its contract for future years by being wide-awake for the
present. It is a strictly business proposition, you see," explained Mr.
White.

"It may seem so to you, but I know that it is a proposition that no
other firm would offer, and we are deeply grateful for your interest,"
replied Mrs. Talmage, sagaciously.

"I'll suggest it, and you find out if the magazine is willing to give us
the mention I hinted at," said Mr. White.

Handing the huge book of addresses to Ike, Mrs. Talmage shook hands with
Mr. White and reminded him to bring his wife to the meeting.

"Well! that was the best hour's business yet!" exclaimed Aunt Selina, as
the car sped away.

"Wonderful, isn't it? I hope everything will glide along as nicely as it
has up to the present," said Mrs. Talmage.

Being Friday, school closed an hour earlier than usual. The moment the
Blue Birds could catch their hats from the pegs in the cloak-rooms, they
ran out to join Ruth, who was hopping from one foot to the other in a
vain effort to calm her impatience.

"Hurry, girls! Don't you know Mother Wings went to the mills this
morning for samples of paper?" called one to the other as they ran up
to Ruth.

It was not long thereafter that seven eager little girls crowded about
Mrs. Talmage on the veranda to hear the news.

"I'll show you the samples, but we will wait for the mothers' opinion
to-night. But this great secret I will give to you now!" and, forthwith,
Mrs. Talmage told the Blue Birds all about Mr. White's interest and
ideas, and showed them the precious volume loaned them.




CHAPTER XI

THE WINTER NEST COUNCIL


Before eight o'clock that night the Blue Birds and their mothers were
assembled in the living-room ready for a council. The children had not
seen the den for a few days and stared in delight as they filed into the
room. Mrs. Talmage had purposely had all meet together before mentioning
that they might as well spend the evening in the Winter Nest.

"Why, Mother Wings, when _did_ you fix this up?" asked Ruth, as much
surprised as the others.

Mrs. Talmage smiled, but said nothing.

The guests looked about and admired the unique charm of the Blue Bird
quarters for the winter, and Betty ventured the question: "What has
become of our other chairs?"

The room had all been renovated. The windows were hung with snow-flake
madras, and the floor covered with heavy knotted white rag carpet that
looked like snow freshly packed. The walls had been repapered with a
sparkling white paper which glistened like ice in the electric light.
From the wainscoting to the picture rail branches of dark green spruce
and pine were fastened and upon these green needles were caught flakes
of make-believe snow--made of white cotton-batting with diamond dust
powdered on it. The furniture of the summer Nest had been brought in
late that afternoon and the slip covers, which had been made for it,
were slipped over until the thick white covers hid the familiar chairs
under the novelty cloth that looked like snow-drifts. The whole effect
was so beautiful that the children danced about with joy.

"Well, we must get at our work," reminded Aunt Selina, after enough
chairs had been brought in for all.

"I walked over with Mr. Wells and he was quite surprised to find I was
coming to the house," said Mrs. Wells, laughingly.

"I never said a word to Mr. Talmage or his brother," confided Mrs.
Talmage, smiling at the secret.

"Mr. Stevens knows I am at this council with Betty, but he hasn't the
faintest idea for what," admitted Mrs. Stevens.

And so it was that not one of the men who had formed the habit of
dropping in to help the Bobolinks could imagine what their wives were
doing with the Blue Birds.

If the inmates of the Winter Nest that night could have seen the
questioning faces of the boys and men when it was known that a meeting
of mothers was being held, they would have felt the balm of satisfaction
applied to wounded pride.

Mrs. Talmage showed the sample of paper and, after a discussion of merit
and price, a selection was made of an artistic grey paper to be printed
in blue--the colors of the Blue Birds.

"We must have envelopes to match, mother," said Ruth.

"I never thought of that, but it is so!" admitted Mrs. Talmage.

"I know the address of a firm where Mr. Wells has all of his
'made-to-order' envelopes made--we will get them to do it," suggested
Mrs. Wells.

"What a relief to hear that offer!" sighed Mrs. Talmage. "I was just
wondering where I could find anyone who would make them for us."

"It also goes to prove that many heads gathered to discuss Blue Bird
affairs are better than one, and I suggest that we meet at least once a
week," suggested Aunt Selina.

So it was then and there agreed that the mothers would come regularly to
hold a council in the Winter Nest with the Blue Birds.

"Just as soon as the envelopes come back we can begin to address from
mother's big book, can't we?" asked Norma.

"If there's only one book, how can all of this crowd read it at the same
time and then write down the names?" demanded Dot Starr.

"Why, we won't have to do that work," added Mrs. Wells. "There's a firm
in the city that addresses envelopes for a dollar a thousand."

"Another fine hint! I'm sure I'd rather pay my share than risk Dot's
ruining dozens of envelopes with ink," laughed Mrs. Starr, patting Dot
on the hand.

"We wouldn't want to write 'em in here, because the snow would freeze
our fingers so the ink would spatter all over," said Dot, ludicrously.

"Yes, I suppose these lovely covers would be speckled black by the time
the Blue Birds completed, say, fifty thousand addresses," laughed Aunt
Selina.

"I would vote against Edith's writing--I fear the person would never get
the letter--it would go straight to the Dead Letter Office," said Mrs.
Wilson, pulling Edith's curls.

As everyone knew how Edith hated writing and never could write a legible
hand, a laugh went up, in which Edith joined heartily.

So the Blue Birds were spared the arduous task of copying thousands of
names.

"I have heard that these large addressing bureaus prefer to employ
children--I wonder why?"

"Because children just finishing grammar school are more careful in
forming letters and can write much better than adults. Besides, they
have to pay children but a third that an adult would demand for his
labor," explained Mrs. Wells.

"Why, isn't that just as bad as working children in a factory?"
questioned Miss Selina.

"The rooms that I visited are just as bad. The girls are crowded close
together in a wretchedly lighted room without ventilation, and they sit
writing all day with their poor backs bent double and fingers grown
crooked from habit," said Mrs. Wells.

"Goodness! Can't we do something to stop it?" cried Mrs. Starr.

"They have to have the money for home needs, and it isn't quite as bad,
you know, as working all day in c