 ivganvoks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

eaidhmai
START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 14552 ***

A CATECHISM OF
CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE


Prepared and Enjoined by Order of
The Third Plenary Council of Baltimore


QUESTIONS NUMBERED TO AGREE WITH
"EXPLANATION OF THE BALTIMORE CATECHISM"


WITH PRAYERS AND HYMNS


No. 2

{For Confirmation Classes}




IMPRIMATUR

New York, April 6, 1885. John Cardinal McCloskey, Archbishop of New
York.

Baltimore, April 6, 1885. "The Catechism ordered by The Third Plenary
Council of Baltimore, having been diligently compared and examined, is
hereby approved."
+ James Gibbons, Archbishop of Baltimore, Apostolic Delegate.




{Transcriber's Note: This book is commonly known as "The Baltimore
Catechism No. 2" and is part of a four volume e-text collection. See
the author's note to Baltimore Catechism No. 3 for the background and
purpose of the series. This e-text collection is substantially based on
files generously provided by http://www.catholic.net/ with some missing
material transcribed and added for this release. Transcriber's notes in
this series are placed within braces, and usually prefixed "T.N.:".}




PRAYERS


THE LORD'S PRAYER

Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name: Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass
against us: and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Amen.


THE ANGELICAL SALUTATION

Hail Mary, full of grace! the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou
amongst women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary,
Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and at the hour of our death.
Amen.


THE APOSTLES' CREED

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth; and
in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified; died, and was buried. He descended into hell; the third day
He arose again from the dead; He ascended into heaven, sitteth at the
right hand of God, the Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to
judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost the Holy
Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.


THE CONFITEOR

I confess to Almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever Virgin, to blessed
Michael the Archangel, to blessed John the Baptist, to the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, and to all the Saints, that I have sinned exceedingly in
thought, word and deed, through my fault, through my fault, through my
most grievous fault. Therefore, I beseech blessed Mary, ever Virgin,
blessed Michael the Archangel, blessed John the Baptist, the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, and all the Saints, to pray to the Lord our God
for me.

May the Almighty God have mercy on me, and forgive me my sins, and bring
me to everlasting life. Amen.

May the Almighty and merciful Lord grant me pardon, absolution, and
remission of all my sins. Amen.


AN ACT OF FAITH

O my God! I firmly believe that Thou art one God in three Divine
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; I believe that Thy Divine Son
became man, and died for our sins, and that he will come to judge the
living and the dead. I believe these and all the truths which the Holy
Catholic Church teaches, because Thou hast revealed them, who canst
neither deceive nor be deceived.


AN ACT OF HOPE

O my God! relying on Thy infinite goodness and promises, I hope to
obtain pardon of my sins, the help of Thy grace, and life everlasting,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Redeemer.


AN ACT OF LOVE

O my God! I love Thee above all things, with my whole heart and soul,
because Thou art all-good and worthy of all love. I love my neighbor as
myself for the love of Thee. I forgive all who have injured me, and ask
pardon of all whom I have injured.


AN ACT OF CONTRITION

O my God! I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee, and I detest all
my sins, because I dread the loss of heaven and the pains of hell, but
most of all because they offend Thee, my God, who art all-good and
deserving of all my love. I firmly resolve, with the help of Thy grace,
to confess my sins, to do penance, and to amend my life.


THE BLESSING BEFORE MEALS

+ Bless us, O Lord! and these Thy gifts, which we are about to receive
from Thy bounty, through Christ our Lord. Amen.


GRACE AFTER MEALS

+ We give Thee thanks for all Thy benefits, O Almighty God, who livest
and reignest forever, and may the souls of the faithful departed
through the mercy of God, rest in peace. Amen.


THE MANNER IN WHICH A LAY PERSON IS TO BAPTIZE IN CASE OF NECESSITY

Pour common water on the head or face of the person to be baptized, and
say while pouring it:

"I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."

N.B. Any person of either sex who has reached the use of reason can
baptize in case of necessity, but the same person must say the words
while pouring the water.




CATECHISM



LESSON FIRST
ON THE END OF MAN


1. Q. Who made the world?
A. God made the world.

2. Q. Who is God?
A. God is the Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things.

3. Q. What is man?
A. Man is a creature composed of body and soul, and made to the image
and likeness of God.

4. Q. Is this likeness in the body or in the soul?
A. This likeness is chiefly in the soul.

5. Q. How is the soul like to God?
A. The soul is like God because it is a spirit that will never die, and
has understanding and free will.

6. Q. Why did God make you?
A. God made me to know Him, to love Him, and to serve Him in this world,
and to be happy with Him forever in the next.

7. Q. Of which must we take more care, our soul or our body?
A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body.

8. Q. Why must we take more care of our soul than of our body?
A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body, because in
losing our soul we lose God and everlasting happiness.

9. Q. What must we do to save our souls?
A. To save our souls we must worship God by faith, hope, and charity;
that is, we must believe in Him, hope in Him, and love Him with all our
heart.

10. Q. How shall we know the things which we are to believe?
A. We shall know the things which we are to believe from the Catholic
Church, through which God speaks to us.

11. Q. Where shall we find the chief truths which the Church teaches?
A. We shall find the chief truths which the Church teaches in the
Apostles' Creed.

12. Q. Say the Apostles' Creed.
A. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth;
and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified; died, and was buried. He descended into hell: the third day
He arose again from the dead: He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at
the right hand of God, the Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to
judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy
Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.



LESSON SECOND
ON GOD AND HIS PERFECTIONS


13. Q. What is God?
A. God is a spirit infinitely perfect.

14. Q. Had God a beginning?
A. God had no beginning; He always was and He always will be.

15. Q. Where is God?
A. God is everywhere.

16. Q. If God is everywhere, why do we not see Him?
A. We do not see God, because He is a pure spirit and cannot be seen
with bodily eyes.

17. Q. Does God see us?
A. God sees us and watches over us.

18. Q. Does God know all things?
A. God knows all things, even our most secret thoughts, words, and
actions.

19. Q. Can God do all things?
A. God can do all things, and nothing is hard or impossible to Him.

20. Q. Is God just, holy, and merciful?
A. God is all just, all holy, all merciful, as He is infinitely perfect.



LESSON THIRD
ON THE UNITY AND TRINITY OF GOD


21. Q. Is there but one God?
A. Yes; there is but one God.

22. Q. Why can there be but one God?
A. There can be but one God, because God, being supreme and infinite,
cannot have an equal.

23. Q. How many Persons are there in God?
A. In God there are three Divine Persons, really distinct, and equal in
all things--the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

24. Q. Is the Father God?
A. The Father is God and the first Person of the Blessed Trinity.

25. Q. Is the Son God?
A. The Son is God and the second Person of the Blessed Trinity.

26. Q. Is the Holy Ghost God?
A. The Holy Ghost is God and the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.

27. Q. What do you mean by the Blessed Trinity?
A. By the Blessed Trinity I mean one God in three Divine Persons.

28. Q. Are the three Divine Persons equal in all things?
A. The three Divine Persons are equal in all things.

29. Q. Are the three Divine Persons one and the same God?
A. The three Divine Persons are one and the same God, having one and the
same Divine nature and substance.

30. Q. Can we fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and
the same God?
A. We cannot fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and
the same God, because this is a mystery.

31. Q. What is a mystery?
A. A mystery is a truth which we cannot fully understand.



LESSON FOURTH
ON CREATION


32. Q. Who created heaven and earth, and all things?
A. God created heaven and earth, and all things.

33. Q. How did God create heaven and earth?
A. God created heaven and earth from nothing by His word only; that is,
by a single act of His all-powerful will.

34. Q. Which are the chief creatures of God?
A. The chief creatures of God are angels and men.

35. Q. What are angels?
A. Angels are pure spirits without a body, created to adore and enjoy
God in heaven.

36. Q. Were the angels created for any other purpose?
A. The angels were also created to assist before the throne of God and
to minister unto Him; they have often been sent as messengers from God
to man; and are also appointed our guardians.

37. Q. Were the angels, as God created them, good and happy?
A. The angels, as God created them, were good and happy.

38. Q. Did all the angels remain good and happy?
A. All the angels did not remain good and happy; many of them sinned and
were cast into hell, and these are called devils or bad angels.



LESSON FIFTH
ON OUR FIRST PARENTS AND THE FALL


39. Q. Who were the first man and woman?
A. The first man and woman were Adam and Eve.

40. Q. Were Adam and Eve innocent and holy when they came from the hand
of God?
A. Adam and Eve were innocent and holy when they came from the hand of
God.

41. Q. Did God give any command to Adam and Eve?
A. To try their obedience God commanded Adam and Eve not to eat of a
certain fruit which grew in the garden of Paradise.

42. Q. Which were the chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve had they
remained faithful to God?
A. The chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve, had they remained
faithful to God, were a constant state of happiness in this life and
everlasting glory in the next.

43. Q. Did Adam and Eve remain faithful to God?
A. Adam and Eve did not remain faithful to God; but broke His command by
eating the forbidden fruit.

44. Q. What befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin?
A. Adam and Eve, on account of their sin, lost innocence and holiness,
and were doomed to sickness and death.

45. Q. What evil befell us on account of the disobedience of our first
parents?
A. On account of the disobedience of our first parents, we all share in
their sin and punishment, as we should have shared in their happiness if
they had remained faithful.

46. Q. What other effects followed from the sin of our first parents?
A. Our nature was corrupted by the sin of our first parents, which
darkened our understanding, weakened our will, and left in us a strong
inclination to evil.

47. Q. What is the sin called which we inherit from our first parents?
A. The sin which we inherit from our first parents is called original
sin.

48. Q. Why is this sin called original?
A. This sin is called original because it comes down to us from our
first parents, and we are brought into the world with its guilt on our
soul.

49. Q. Does this corruption of our nature remain in us after original
sin is forgiven?
A. This corruption of our nature and other punishments remain in us
after original sin is forgiven.

50. Q. Was any one ever preserved from original sin?
A. The Blessed Virgin Mary, through the merits of her Divine Son, was
preserved free from the guilt of original sin, and this privilege is
called her Immaculate Conception.



LESSON SIXTH
ON SIN AND ITS KINDS


51. Q. Is original sin the only kind of sin?
A. Original sin is not the only kind of sin; there is another kind of
sin, which we commit ourselves, called actual sin.

52. Q. What is actual sin?
A. Actual sin is any wilful thought, word, deed, or omission contrary to
the law of God.

53. Q. How many kinds of actual sin are there?
A. There are two kinds of actual sin--mortal and venial.

54. Q. What is mortal sin?
A. Mortal sin is a grievous offense against the law of God.

55. Q. Why is this sin called mortal?
A. This sin is called mortal because it deprives us of spiritual life,
which is sanctifying grace, and brings everlasting death and damnation
on the soul.

56. Q. How many things are necessary to make a sin mortal?
A. To make a sin mortal three things are necessary: a grievous matter,
sufficient reflection, and full consent of the will.

57. Q. What is venial sin?
A. Venial sin is a slight offense against the law of God in matters of
less importance, or in matters of great importance it is an offense
committed without sufficient reflection or full consent of the will.

58. Q. Which are the effects of venial sin?
A. The effects of venial sin are the lessening of the love of God in our
heart, the making us less worthy of His help, and the weakening of the
power to resist mortal sin.

59. Q. Which are the chief sources of sin?
A. The chief sources of sin are seven: Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger,
Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth; and they are commonly called capital sins.



LESSON SEVENTH
ON THE INCARNATION AND REDEMPTION


60. Q. Did God abandon man after he fell into sin?
A. God did not abandon man after he fell into sin, but promised him a
Redeemer, who was to satisfy for man's sin and reopen to him the gates
of heaven.

61. Q. Who is the Redeemer?
A. Our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of mankind.

62. Q. What do you believe of Jesus Christ?
A. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the second Person of
the Blessed Trinity, true God and true man.

63. Q. Why is Jesus Christ true God?
A. Jesus Christ is true God because He is the true and only Son of God
the Father.

64. Q. Why is Jesus Christ true man?
A. Jesus Christ is true man because He is the Son of the Blessed Virgin
Mary and has a body and soul like ours.

65. Q. How many natures are there in Jesus Christ?
A. In Jesus Christ there are two natures, the nature of God and the
nature of man.

66. Q. Is Jesus Christ more than one person?
A. No, Jesus Christ is but one Divine Person.

67. Q. Was Jesus Christ always God?
A. Jesus Christ was always God, as He is the second Person of the
Blessed Trinity, equal to His Father from all eternity.

68. Q. Was Jesus Christ always man?
A. Jesus Christ was not always man, but became man at the time of His
Incarnation.

69. Q. What do you mean by the Incarnation?
A. By the Incarnation I mean that the Son of God was made man.

70. Q. How was the Son of God made man?
A. The Son of God was conceived and made man by the power of the Holy
Ghost, in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

71. Q. Is the Blessed Virgin Mary truly the Mother of God?
A. The Blessed Virgin Mary is truly the Mother of God, because the same
Divine Person who is the Son of God is also the Son of the Blessed
Virgin Mary.

72. Q. Did the Son of God become man immediately after the sin of our
first parents?
A. The Son of God did not become man immediately after the sin of our
first parents, but was promised to them as a Redeemer.

73. Q. How could they be saved who lived before the Son of God became
man?
A. They who lived before the Son of God became man could be saved by
believing in a Redeemer to come, and by keeping the commandments.

74. Q. On what day was the Son of God conceived and made man?
A. The Son of God was conceived and made man on Annunciation day--the
day on which the Angel Gabriel announced to the Blessed Virgin Mary that
she was to be the Mother of God.

75. Q. On what day was Christ born?
A. Christ was born on Christmas day in a stable at Bethlehem, over
nineteen hundred years ago.

76. Q. How long did Christ live on earth?
A. Christ lived on earth about thirty-three years, and led a most holy
life in poverty and suffering.

77. Q. Why did Christ live so long on earth?
A. Christ lived so long on earth to show us the way to heaven by His
teachings and example.



LESSON EIGHTH
ON OUR LORD'S PASSION, DEATH, RESURRECTION, AND ASCENSION


78. Q. What did Jesus Christ suffer?
A. Jesus Christ suffered a bloody sweat, a cruel scourging, was crowned
with thorns, and was crucified.

79. Q. On what day did Christ die?
A. Christ died on Good Friday.

80. Q. Why do you call that day "good" on which Christ died so sorrowful
a death?
A. We call that day "good" on which Christ died because by His death He
showed His great love for man, and purchased for him every blessing.

81. Q. Where did Christ die?
A. Christ died on Mount Calvary.

82. Q. How did Christ die?
A. Christ was nailed to the Cross and died on it between two thieves.

83. Q. Why did Christ suffer and die?
A. Christ suffered and died for our sins.

84. Q. What lessons do we learn from the sufferings and death of Christ?
A. From the sufferings and death of Christ we learn the great evil of
sin, the hatred God bears to it, and the necessity of satisfying for it.

85. Q. Where did Christ's soul go after His death?
A. After Christ's death His soul descended into hell.

86. Q. Did Christ's soul descend into the hell of the damned?
A. The hell into which Christ's soul descended was not the hell of the
damned, but a place or state of rest called Limbo, where the souls of
the just were waiting for Him.

87. Q. Why did Christ descend into Limbo?
A. Christ descended into Limbo to preach to the souls who were in
prison--that is, to announce to them the joyful tidings of their
redemption.

88. Q. Where was Christ's body while His soul was in Limbo?
A. While Christ's soul was in Limbo His body was in the holy sepulchre.

89. Q. On what day did Christ rise from the dead?
A. Christ rose from the dead, glorious and immortal, on Easter Sunday,
the third day after His death.

90. Q. How long did Christ stay on earth after His resurrection?
A. Christ stayed on earth forty days after His resurrection to show that
He was truly risen from the dead, and to instruct His Apostles.

91. Q. After Christ had remained forty days on earth whither did He go?
A. After forty days Christ ascended into heaven, and the day on which He
ascended into heaven is called Ascension day.

92. Q. Where is Christ in heaven?
A. In heaven Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.

93. Q. What do you mean by saying that Christ sits at the right hand Of
God?
A. When I say that Christ sits at the right hand of God I mean that
Christ as God is equal to His Father in all things, and that as man He
is in the highest place in heaven next to God.



LESSON NINTH
ON THE HOLY GHOST AND HIS DESCENT UPON THE APOSTLES


94. Q. Who is the Holy Ghost?
A. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.

95. Q. From whom does the Holy Ghost proceed?
A. The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.

96. Q. Is the Holy Ghost equal to the Father and the Son?
A. The Holy Ghost is equal to the Father and the Son, being the same
Lord and God as They are.

97. Q. On what day did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?
A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles ten days after the
Ascension of our Lord; and the day on which He came down upon the
Apostles is called Whitsunday, or Pentecost.

98. Q. How did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?
A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in the form of tongues of
fire.

99. Q. Who sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles?
A. Our Lord Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.

100. Q. Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost?
A. Christ sent the Holy Ghost to sanctify His Church, to enlighten and
strengthen the Apostles, and to enable them to preach the Gospel.

101. Q. Will the Holy Ghost abide with the Church forever?
A. The Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever, and guide it in
the way of holiness and truth.



LESSON TENTH
ON THE EFFECTS OF THE REDEMPTION


102. Q. Which are the chief effects of the Redemption?
A. The chief effects of the Redemption are two: The satisfaction of
God's justice by Christ's sufferings and death, and the gaining of grace
for men.

103. Q. What do you mean by grace?
A. By grace I mean a supernatural gift of God bestowed on us, through
the merits of Jesus Christ, for our salvation.

104. Q. How many kinds of grace are there?
A. There are two kinds of grace, sanctifying grace and actual grace.

105. Q. What is sanctifying grace?
A. Sanctifying grace is that grace which makes the soul holy and
pleasing to God.

106. Q. What do you call those graces or gifts of God by which we
believe in Him, hope in Him, and love Him?
A. Those graces or gifts of God by which we believe in Him, and hope in
Him, and love Him, are called the Divine virtues of Faith, Hope, and
Charity.

107. Q. What is Faith?
A. Faith is a Divine virtue by which we firmly believe the truths which
God has revealed.

108. Q. What is Hope?
A. Hope is a Divine virtue by which we firmly trust that God will give
us eternal life and the means to obtain it.

109. Q. What is Charity?
A. Charity is a Divine virtue by which we love God above all things for
His own sake, and our neighbor as ourselves for the love of God.

110. Q. What is actual grace?
A. Actual grace is that help of God which enlightens our mind and moves
our will to shun evil and do good.

111. Q. Is grace necessary to salvation?
A. Grace is necessary to salvation, because without grace we can do
nothing to merit heaven.

112. Q. Can we resist the grace of God?
A. We can and unfortunately often do resist the grace of God.

113. Q. What is the grace of perseverance?
A. The grace of perseverance is a particular gift of God which enables
us to continue in the state of grace till death.



LESSON ELEVENTH
ON THE CHURCH


114. Q. Which are the means instituted by our Lord to enable men at all
times to share in the fruits of the Redemption?
A. The means instituted by our Lord to enable men at all times to share
in the fruits of His Redemption are the Church and the Sacraments.

115. Q. What is the Church?
A. The Church is the congregation of all those who profess the faith of
Christ, partake of the same Sacraments, and are governed by their lawful
pastors under one visible head.

116. Q. Who is the invisible Head of the Church?
A. Jesus Christ is the invisible Head of the Church.

117. Q. Who is the visible Head of the Church?
A. Our Holy Father the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the Vicar of Christ
on earth and the visible Head of the Church.

118. Q. Why is the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, the visible Head of the
Church?
A. The Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the visible Head of the Church
because he is the successor of St. Peter, whom Christ made the chief of
the Apostles and the visible Head of the Church.

119. Q. Who are the successors of the other Apostles?
A. The successors of the other Apostles are the bishops of the Holy
Catholic Church.

120. Q. Why did Christ found the Church?
A. Christ founded the Church to teach, govern, sanctify, and save all
men.

121. Q. Are all bound to belong to the Church?
A. All are bound to belong to the Church, and he who knows the Church to
be the true Church and remains out of it cannot be saved.



LESSON TWELFTH
ON THE ATTRIBUTES AND MARKS OF THE CHURCH


122. Q. Which are the attributes of the Church?
A. The attributes of the Church are three: authority infallibility, and
indefectibility.

123. Q. What do you mean by the authority of the Church?
A. By the authority of the Church I mean the right and power which the
Pope and the bishops, as the successors of the Apostles, have to teach
and to govern the faithful.

124. Q. What do you mean by the infallibility of the Church?
A. By the infallibility of the Church I mean that the Church cannot err
when it teaches a doctrine of faith or morals.

125. Q. When does the Church teach infallibly?
A. The Church teaches infallibly when it speaks through the Pope and the
bishops, united in general council, or through the Pope alone when he
proclaims to all the faithful a doctrine of faith or morals.

126. Q. What do you mean by the indefectibility of the Church?
A. By the indefectibility of the Church I mean that the Church, as
Christ founded it, will last till the end of time.

127. Q. In whom are these attributes found in their fullness?
A. These attributes are found in their fullness in the Pope, the visible
Head of the Church, whose infallible authority to teach bishops,
priests, and people in matters of faith or morals will last till the end
of the world.

128. Q. Has the Church any marks by which it may be known?
A. The Church has four marks by which it may be known: it is One; it is
Holy; it is Catholic; it is Apostolic.

129. Q. How is the Church One?
A. The Church is One because all its members agree in one faith, are all
in one communion, and are all under one Head.

130. Q. How is the Church Holy?
A. The Church is Holy because its founder, Jesus Christ, is holy;
because it teaches a holy doctrine; invites all to a holy life; and
because of the eminent holiness of so many thousands of its children.

131. Q. How is the Church Catholic or universal?
A. The Church is Catholic or universal because it subsists in all ages,
teaches all nations, and maintains all truth.

132. Q. How is the Church Apostolic?
A. The Church is Apostolic because it was founded by Christ on His
Apostles, and is governed by their lawful successors, and because it has
never ceased, and never will cease, to teach their doctrine.

133. Q. In which Church are these attributes and marks found?
A. These attributes and marks are found in the Holy Roman Catholic
Church alone.

134. Q. From whom does the Church derive its undying life and infallible
authority?
A. The Church derives its undying life and infallible authority from the
Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, who abides with it forever.

135. Q. By whom is the Church made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic?
A. The Church is made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic by the Holy
Ghost, the spirit of love and holiness, who unites and sanctifies its
members throughout the world.



LESSON THIRTEENTH
ON THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL


136. Q. What is a Sacrament?
A. A Sacrament is an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace.

137. Q. How many Sacraments are there?
A. There are seven Sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony.

138. Q. Whence have the Sacraments the power of giving grace?
A. The Sacraments have the power of giving grace from the merits of
Jesus Christ.

139. Q. What grace do the Sacraments give?
A. Some of the Sacraments give sanctifying grace, and others increase it
in our souls.

140. Q. Which are the Sacraments that give sanctifying grace?
A. The Sacraments that give sanctifying grace are Baptism and Penance;
and they are called Sacraments of the dead.

141. Q. Why are Baptism and Penance called Sacraments of the dead?
A. Baptism and Penance are called Sacraments of the dead, because they
take away sin, which is the death of the soul, and give grace, which is
its life.

142. Q. Which are the Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our
soul?
A. The Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our soul are:
Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and
Matrimony; and they are called Sacraments of the living.

143. Q. Why are Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy
Orders, and Matrimony called Sacraments of the living?
A. Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and
Matrimony are called Sacraments of the living, because those who receive
them worthily are already living the life of grace.

144. Q. What sin does he commit who receives the Sacraments of the
living in mortal sin?
A. He who receives the Sacraments of the living in mortal sin commits a
sacrilege, which is a great sin, because it is an abuse of a sacred
thing.

145. Q. Besides sanctifying grace do the Sacraments give any other
grace?
A. Besides sanctifying grace the Sacraments give another grace, called
sacramental.

146. Q. What is sacramental grace?
A. Sacramental grace is a special help which God gives, to attain the
end for which He instituted each Sacrament.

147. Q. Do the Sacraments always give grace?
A. The Sacraments always give grace, if we receive them with the right
dispositions.

148. Q. Can we receive the Sacraments more than once?
A. We can receive the Sacraments more than once, except Baptism,
Confirmation, and Holy Orders.

149. Q. Why can we not receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders
more than once?
A. We cannot receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders more than
once, because they imprint a character in the soul.

150. Q. What is the character which these Sacraments imprint in the
soul?
A. The character which these Sacraments imprint in the soul is a
spiritual mark which remains forever.

151. Q. Does this character remain in the soul even after death?
A. This character remains in the soul even after death: for the honor
and glory of those who are saved; for the shame and punishment of those
who are lost.



LESSON FOURTEENTH
ON BAPTISM


152. Q. What is Baptism?
A. Baptism is a Sacrament which cleanses us from original sin, makes us
Christians, children of God, and heirs of heaven.

153. Q. Are actual sins ever remitted by Baptism?
A. Actual sins and all the punishment due to them are remitted by
Baptism, if the person baptized be guilty of any.

154. Q. Is Baptism necessary to salvation?
A. Baptism is necessary to salvation, because without it we cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

155. Q. Who can administer Baptism?
A. The priest is the ordinary minister of Baptism; but in case of
necessity any one who has the use of reason may baptize.

156. Q. How is Baptism given?
A. Whoever baptizes should pour water on the head of the person to be
baptized, and say, while pouring the water: I baptize thee in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

157. Q. How many kinds of Baptism are there?
A. There are three kinds of Baptism: Baptism of water, of desire, and of
blood.

158. Q. What is Baptism of water?
A. Baptism of water is that which is given by pouring water on the head
of the person to be baptized, and saying at the same time: I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

159. Q. What is Baptism of desire?
A. Baptism of desire is an ardent wish to receive Baptism, and to do all
that God has ordained for our salvation.

160. Q. What is Baptism of blood?
A. Baptism of blood is the shedding of one's blood for the faith of
Christ.

161. Q. Is Baptism of desire or of blood sufficient to produce the
effects of Baptism of water?
A. Baptism of desire or of blood is sufficient to produce the effects of
the Baptism of water, if it is impossible to receive the Baptism of
water.

162. Q. What do we promise in Baptism?
A. In Baptism we promise to renounce the devil with all his works and
pomps.

163. Q. Why is the name of a saint given in Baptism?
A. The name of a saint is given in Baptism in order that the person
baptized may imitate his virtues and have him for a protector.

164. Q. Why are godfathers and godmothers given in Baptism?
A. Godfathers and godmothers are given in Baptism in order that they may
promise, in the name of the child, what the child itself would promise
if it had the use of reason.

165. Q. What is the obligation of a godfather and a godmother?
A. The obligation of a godfather and a godmother is to instruct the
child in its religious duties, if the parents neglect to do so or die.



LESSON FIFTEENTH
ON CONFIRMATION


166. Q. What is Confirmation?
A. Confirmation is a Sacrament through which we receive the Holy Ghost
to make us strong and perfect Christians and soldiers of Jesus Christ.

167. Q. Who administers Confirmation?
A. The bishop is the ordinary minister of Confirmation.

168. Q. How does the bishop give Confirmation?
A. The bishop extends his hands over those who are to be confirmed,
prays that they may receive the Holy Ghost, and anoints the forehead of
each with holy chrism in the form of a cross.

169. Q. What is holy chrism?
A. Holy chrism is a mixture of olive-oil and balm, consecrated by the
bishop.

170. Q. What does the bishop say in anointing the person he confirms?
A. In anointing the person he confirms the bishop says: I sign thee with
the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of salvation,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

171. Q. What is meant by anointing the forehead with chrism in the form
of a cross?
A. By anointing the forehead with chrism in the form of a cross is
meant, that the Christian who is confirmed must openly profess and
practice his faith, never be ashamed of it, and rather die than deny it.

172. Q. Why does the bishop give the person he confirms a slight blow on
the cheek?
A. The bishop gives the person he confirms a slight blow on the cheek,
to put him in mind that he must be ready to suffer everything, even
death, for the sake of Christ.

173. Q. To receive Confirmation worthily is it necessary to be in the
state of grace?
A. To receive Confirmation worthily it is necessary to be in the state
of grace.

174. Q. What special preparation should be made to receive Confirmation?
A. Persons of an age to learn should know the chief mysteries of faith
and the duties of a Christian, and be instructed in the nature and
effects of this Sacrament.

175. Q. Is it a sin to neglect Confirmation?
A. It is a sin to neglect Confirmation, especially in these evil days
when faith and morals are exposed to so many and such violent
temptations.



LESSON SIXTEENTH
ON THE GIFTS AND FRUITS OF THE HOLY GHOST


176. Q. Which are the effects of Confirmation?
A. The effects of Confirmation are an increase of sanctifying grace, the
strengthening of our faith, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

177. Q. Which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost?
A. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel,
Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety and Fear of the Lord.

178. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Fear of the Lord?
A. We receive the gift of Fear of the Lord to fill us with a dread of
sin.

179. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Piety?
A. We receive the gift of Piety to make us love God as a Father and obey
Him because we love Him.

180. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Knowledge?
A. We receive the gift of Knowledge to enable us to discover the will of
God in all things.

181. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Fortitude?
A. We receive the gift of Fortitude to strengthen us to do the will of
God in all things.

182. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Counsel?
A. We receive the gift of Counsel to warn us of the deceits of the
devil, and of the dangers to salvation.

183. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Understanding?
A. We receive the gift of Understanding to enable us to know more
clearly the mysteries of faith.

184. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Wisdom?
A. We receive the gift of Wisdom to give us a relish for the things of
God, and to direct our whole life and all our actions to His honor and
glory.

185. Q. Which are the Beatitudes?
A. The Beatitudes are:

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
2. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land.
3. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall
   be filled.
5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
6. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.
7. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of
   God.
8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice sake, for theirs
   is the kingdom of heaven.

186. Q. Which are the twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost?
A. The twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost are Charity, Joy, Peace,
Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Long-suffering, Mildness, Faith, Modesty,
Continency, and Chastity.



LESSON SEVENTEENTH
ON THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE


187. Q. What is the Sacrament of Penance?
A. Penance is a Sacrament in which the sins committed after Baptism are
forgiven.

188. Q. How does the Sacrament of Penance remit sin, and restore to the
soul the friendship of God?
A. The Sacrament of Penance remits sins and restores the friendship of
God to the soul by means of the absolution of the priest.

189. Q. How do you know that the priest has the power of absolving from
the sins committed after Baptism?
A. I know that the priest has the power of absolving from the sins
committed after Baptism, because Jesus Christ granted that power to the
priests of His Church when He said: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose
sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; whose sins you shall
retain, they are retained."

190. Q. How do the priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving
sins?
A. The priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving sins by
hearing the confession of sins, and granting pardon for them as
ministers of God and in His name.

191. Q. What must we do to receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily?
A. To receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily we must do five things:

1. We must examine our conscience.
2. We must have sorrow for our sins.
3. We must make a firm resolution never more to offend God.
4. We must confess our sins to the priest.
5. We must accept the penance which the priest gives us.

192. Q. What is the examination of conscience?
A. The examination of conscience is an earnest effort to recall to mind
all the sins we have committed since our last worthy confession.

193. Q. How can we make a good examination of conscience?
A. We can make a good examination of conscience by calling to memory the
commandments of God, the precepts of the Church, the seven capital sins,
and the particular duties of our state in life, to find out the sins we
have committed.

194. Q. What should we do before beginning the examination of
conscience?
A. Before beginning the examination of conscience we should pray to God
to give us light to know our sins and grace to detest them.



LESSON EIGHTEENTH
ON CONTRITION


195. Q. What is contrition, or sorrow for sin?
A. Contrition, or sorrow for sin, is a hatred of sin and a true grief of
the soul for having offended God, with a firm purpose of sinning no
more.

196. Q. What kind of sorrow should we have for our sins?
A. The sorrow we should have for our sins should be interior,
supernatural, universal, and sovereign.

197. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be interior?
A. When I say that our sorrow should be interior, I mean that it should
come from the heart, and not merely from the lips.

198. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be
supernatural?
A. When I say that our sorrow should be supernatural, I mean that it
should be prompted by the grace of God, and excited by motives which
spring from faith, and not by merely natural motives.

199. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be universal?
A. When I say that our sorrow should be universal, I mean that we should
be sorry for all our mortal sins without exception.

200. Q. What do you mean when you say that our sorrow should be
sovereign?
A. When I say that our sorrow should be sovereign, I mean that we should
grieve more for having offended God than for any other evil that can
befall us.

201. Q. Why should we be sorry for our sins?
A. We should be sorry for our sins, because sin is the greatest of evils
and an offense against God our Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer, and
because it shuts us out of heaven and condemns us to the eternal pains
of hell.

202. Q. How many kinds of contrition are there?
A. There are two kinds of contrition: perfect contrition and imperfect
contrition.

203. Q. What is perfect contrition?
A. Perfect contrition is that which fills us with sorrow and hatred for
sin, because it offends God, who is infinitely good in Himself and
worthy of all love.

204. Q. What is imperfect contrition?
A. Imperfect contrition is that by which we hate what offends God,
because by it we lose heaven and deserve hell; or because sin is so
hateful in itself.

205. Q. Is imperfect contrition sufficient for a worthy confession?
A. Imperfect contrition is sufficient for a worthy confession, but we
should endeavor to have perfect contrition.

206. Q. What do you mean by a firm purpose of sinning no more?
A. By a firm purpose of sinning no more I mean a fixed resolve not only
to avoid all mortal sin, but also its near occasions.

207. Q. What do you mean by the near occasions of sin?
A. By the near occasions of sin I mean all the persons, places, and
things that may easily lead us into sin.



LESSON NINETEENTH
ON CONFESSION


208. Q. What is Confession?
A. Confession is the telling of our sins to a duly authorized priest,
for the purpose of obtaining forgiveness.

209. Q. What sins are we bound to confess?
A. We are bound to confess all our mortal sins, but it is well also to
confess our venial sins.

210. Q. Which are the chief qualities of a good Confession?
A. The chief qualities of a good Confession are three: it must be
humble, sincere, and entire.

211. Q. When is our Confession humble?
A. Our Confession is humble, when we accuse our selves of our sins, with
a deep sense of shame and sorrow for having offended God.

212. Q. When is our Confession sincere?
A. Our Confession is sincere, when we tell our sins honestly and
truthfully, neither exaggerating nor excusing them.

213. Q. When is our Confession entire?
A. Our Confession is entire, when we tell the number and kinds of our
sins and the circumstances which change their nature.

214. Q. What should we do if we cannot remember the number of our sins?
A. If we cannot remember the number of our sins, we should tell the
number as nearly as possible, and say how often we may have sinned in a
day, a week, or a month, and how long the habit or practice has lasted.

215. Q. Is our Confession worthy if, without our fault, we forget to
confess a mortal sin?
A. If without our fault we forget to confess a mortal sin, our
Confession is worthy, and the sin is forgiven; but it must be told in
Confession if it again comes to our mind.

216. Q. Is it a grievous offense wilfully to conceal a mortal sin in
Confession?
A. It is a grievous offense wilfully to conceal a mortal sin in
Confession, because we thereby tell a lie to the Holy Ghost, and make
our Confession worthless.

217. Q. What must he do who has wilfully concealed a mortal sin in
Confession?
A. He who has wilfully concealed a mortal sin in Confession must not
only confess it, but must also repeat all the sins he has committed
since his last worthy Confession.

218. Q. Why does the priest give us a penance after Confession?
A. The priest gives us a penance after Confession, that we may satisfy
God for the temporal punishment due to our sins.

219. Q. Does not the Sacrament of Penance remit all punishment due to
sin?
A. The Sacrament of Penance remits the eternal punishment due to sin,
but it does not always remit the temporal punishment which God requires
as satisfaction for our sins.

220. Q. Why does God require a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for
sin?
A. God requires a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for sin, to
teach us the great evil of sin and to prevent us from falling again.

221. Q. Which are the chief means by which we satisfy God for the
temporal punishment due to sin?
A. The chief means by which we satisfy God for the temporal punishment
due to sin are: Prayer, Fasting, Almsgiving, all spiritual and corporal
works of mercy, and the patient suffering of the ills of life.

222. Q. Which are the chief spiritual works of mercy?
A. The chief spiritual works of mercy are seven: To admonish the sinner,
to instruct the ignorant, to counsel the doubtful, to comfort the
sorrowful, to bear wrongs patiently, to forgive all injuries, and to
pray for the living and the dead.

223. Q. Which are the chief corporal works of mercy?
A. The chief corporal works of mercy are seven: To feed the hungry, to
give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to ransom the captive,
to harbor the harborless, to visit the sick, and to bury the dead.



LESSON TWENTIETH
ON THE MANNER OF MAKING A GOOD CONFESSION


224. Q. What should we do on entering the confessional?
A. On entering the confessional we should kneel, make the sign of the
Cross, and say to the priest, Bless me, Father; then add, I confess to
Almighty God and to you, Father, that I have sinned.

225. Q. Which are the first things we should tell the priest in
Confession?
A. The first things we should tell the priest in Confession are the time
of our last Confession, and whether we said the penance and went to Holy
Communion.

226. Q. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion what
should we do?
A. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion we should
confess all the mortal sins we have since committed, and all the venial
sins we may wish to mention.

227. Q. What must we do when the confessor asks us questions?
A. When the confessor asks us questions we must answer them truthfully
and clearly.

228. Q. What should we do after telling our sins?
A. After telling our sins we should listen with attention to the advice
which the confessor may think proper to give.

229. Q. How should we end our Confession?
A. We should end our Confession by saying, I also accuse myself of all
the sins of my past life, telling, if we choose, one or several of our
past sins.

230. Q. What should we do while the priest is giving us absolution?
A. While the priest is giving us absolution we should from our heart
renew the Act of Contrition.



LESSON TWENTY-FIRST
ON INDULGENCES


231. Q. What is an Indulgence?
A. An Indulgence is the remission in whole or in part of the temporal
punishment due to sin.

232. Q. Is an Indulgence a pardon of sin, or a license to commit sin?
A. An Indulgence is not a pardon of sin, nor a license to commit sin,
and one who is in a state of mortal sin cannot gain an Indulgence.

233. Q. How many kinds of Indulgences are there?
A. There are two kinds of Indulgences--Plenary and Partial.

234. Q. What is a Plenary Indulgence?
A. A Plenary Indulgence is the full remission of the temporal punishment
due to sin.

235. Q. What is a Partial Indulgence?
A. A Partial Indulgence is the remission of a part of the temporal
punishment due to sin.

236. Q. How does the Church by means of Indulgences remit the temporal
punishment due to sin?
A. The Church by means of Indulgences remits the temporal punishment due
to sin by applying to us the merits of Jesus Christ, and the
superabundant satisfactions of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the
saints; which merits and satisfactions are its spiritual treasury.

237. Q. What must we do to gain an Indulgence?
A. To gain an Indulgence we must be in the state of grace and perform
the works enjoined.



LESSON TWENTY-SECOND
ON THE HOLY EUCHARIST


238. Q. What is the Holy Eucharist?
A. The Holy Eucharist is the Sacrament which contains the body and
blood, soul and divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ under the appearances
of bread and wine.

239. Q. When did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist?
A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist at the Last Supper, the night
before He died.

240. Q. Who were present when our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist?
A. When our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist the twelve Apostles were
present.

241. Q. How did our Lord institute the Holy Eucharist?
A. Our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist by taking bread, blessing,
breaking, and giving to His Apostles, saying: Take ye and eat. This is
My body; and then by taking the cup of wine, blessing and giving it,
saying to them: Drink ye all of this. This is My blood which shall be
shed for the remission of sins. Do this for a commemoration of Me.

242. Q. What happened when our Lord said, This is My body; this is My
blood?
A. When our Lord said, This is My body, the substance of the bread was
changed into the substance of His body; when He said, This is My blood,
the substance of the wine was changed into the substance of His blood.

243. Q. Is Jesus Christ whole and entire both under the form of bread
and under the form of wine?
A. Jesus Christ is whole and entire both under the form of bread and
under the form of wine.

244. Q. Did anything remain of the bread and wine after their substance
had been changed into the substance of the body and blood of our Lord?
A. After the substance of the bread and wine had been changed into the
substance of the body and blood of our Lord there remained only the
appearances of bread and wine.

245. Q. What do you mean by the appearances of bread and wine?
A. By the appearances of bread and wine I mean the figure, the color,
the taste, and whatever appears to the senses.

246. Q. What is this change of the bread and wine into the body and
blood of our Lord called?
A. This change of the bread and wine into the body and blood of our Lord
is called Transubstantiation.

247. Q. How was the substance of the bread and wine changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ?
A. The substance of the bread and wine was changed into the substance of
the body and blood of Christ by His almighty power.

248. Q. Does this change of bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ continue to be made in the Church?
A. This change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ
continues to be made in the Church by Jesus Christ through the ministry
of His priests.

249. Q. When did Christ give His priests the power to change bread and
wine into His body and blood?
A. Christ gave His priests the power to change bread and wine into His
body and blood when He said to the Apostles, Do this in commemoration of
Me.

250. Q. How do the priests exercise this power of changing bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ?
A. The priests exercise this power of changing bread and wine into the
body and blood of Christ through the words of consecration in the Mass,
which are the words of Christ: This is My body; this is My blood.



LESSON TWENTY-THIRD
ON THE ENDS FOR WHICH THE HOLY EUCHARIST WAS INSTITUTED


251. Q. Why did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist?
A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist--

1. To unite us to Himself and to nourish our soul with His divine life.
2. To increase sanctifying grace and all virtues in our soul.
3. To lessen our evil inclinations.
4. To be a pledge of everlasting life.
5. To fit our bodies for a glorious resurrection.
6. To continue the sacrifice of the Cross in His Church.

252. Q. How are we united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist?
A. We are united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist by means of Holy
Communion.

253. Q. What is Holy Communion?
A. Holy Communion is the receiving of the body and blood of Christ.

254. Q. What is necessary to make a good Communion?
A. To make a good Communion it is necessary to be in the state of
sanctifying grace, to have a right intention, and to obey the laws of
fasting. (See Q. 257.)

255. Q. Does he who receives Communion in mortal sin receive the body
and blood of Christ?
A. He who receives Communion in mortal sin receives the body and blood
of Christ, but does not receive His grace, and he commits a great
sacrilege.

256. Q. Is it enough to be free from mortal sin to receive plentifully
the graces of Holy Communion?
A. To receive plentifully the graces of Holy Communion it is not enough
to be free from mortal sin, but we should be free from all affection to
venial sin, and should make acts of faith, hope, and love.

257. Q. What is the fast necessary for Holy Communion?
A. The fast necessary for Holy Communion is to abstain from all food,
beverages, and alcoholic drinks for one hour before Holy Communion.
Water may be taken at any time. The sick may take food, non-alcoholic
drinks, and any medicine up to Communion time.

[This answer has been changed in the 1977 printing to bring it up to
date with the current rules.]

258. Q. Is any one ever allowed to receive Holy Communion when not
fasting?
A. Any one in danger of death is allowed to receive Holy Communion when
not fasting or when it is necessary to save the Blessed Sacrament from
insult or injury.

259. Q. When are we bound to receive Holy Communion?
A. We are bound to receive Holy Communion, under pain of mortal sin,
during the Easter time and when in danger of death.

260. Q. Is it well to receive Holy Communion often?
A. It is well to receive Holy Communion often, as nothing is a greater
aid to a holy life than often to receive the Author of all grace and the
Source of all good.

261. Q. What should we do after Holy Communion?
A. After Holy Communion we should spend some time in adoring our Lord,
in thanking Him for the grace we have received, and in asking Him for
the blessings we need.



LESSON TWENTY-FOURTH
ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS


262. Q. When and where are the bread and wine changed into the body and
blood of Christ?
A. The bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ at
the Consecration in the Mass.

263. Q. What is the Mass?
A. The Mass is the unbloody sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.

264. Q. What is a sacrifice?
A. A sacrifice is the offering of an object by a priest to God alone,
and the consuming of it to acknowledge that He is the Creator and Lord
of all things.

265. Q. Is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross?
A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross.

266. Q. How is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross?
A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross because the
offering and the priest are the same--Christ our Blessed Lord; and the
ends for which the sacrifice of the Mass is offered are the same as
those of the sacrifice of the Cross.

267. Q. What were the ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was
offered?
A. The ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was offered were: 1st,
To honor and glorify God; 2d, To thank Him for all the graces bestowed
on the whole world; 3d, To satisfy God's justice for the sins of men;
4th, To obtain all graces and blessings.

268. Q. Is there any difference between the sacrifice of the Cross and
the sacrifice of the Mass?
A. Yes; the manner in which the sacrifice is offered is different. On
the Cross Christ really shed His blood and was really slain; in the Mass
there is no real shedding of blood nor real death, because Christ can
die no more; but the sacrifice of the Mass, through the separate
consecration of the bread and the wine, represents His death on the
Cross.

269. Q. How should we assist at Mass?
A. We should assist at Mass with great interior recollection and piety
and with every outward mark of respect and devotion.

270. Q. Which is the best manner of hearing Mass?
A. The best manner of hearing Mass is to offer it to God with the priest
for the same purpose for which it is said, to meditate on Christ's
sufferings and death, and to go to Holy Communion.



LESSON TWENTY-FIFTH
ON EXTREME UNCTION AND HOLY ORDERS


271. Q. What is the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?
A. Extreme Unction is the Sacrament which, through the anointing and
prayer of the priest, gives health and strength to the soul, and
sometimes to the body, when we are in danger of death from sickness.

272. Q. When should we receive Extreme Unction?
A. We should receive Extreme Unction when we are in danger of death from
sickness, or from a wound or accident.

273. Q. Should we wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive
Extreme Unction?
A. We should not wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive
Extreme Unction, but if possible we should receive it whilst we have the
use of our senses.

274. Q. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?
A. The effects of Extreme Unction are: 1st, To comfort us in the pains
of sickness and to strengthen us against temptation; 2d, To remit venial
sins and to cleanse our soul from the remains of sin; 3d, To restore us
to health, when God sees fit.

275. Q. What do you mean by the remains of sin?
A. By the remains of sin I mean the inclination to evil and the weakness
of the will which are the result of our sins, and which remain after our
sins have been forgiven.

276. Q. How should we receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?
A. We should receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction in the state of
grace, and with lively faith and resignation to the will of God.

277. Q. Who is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?
A. The priest is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

278. Q. What is the Sacrament of Holy Orders?
A. Holy Orders is a Sacrament by which bishops, priests, and other
ministers of the Church are ordained and receive the power and grace to
perform their sacred duties.

279. Q. What is necessary to receive Holy Orders worthily?
A. To receive Holy Orders worthily it is necessary to be in the state of
grace, to have the necessary knowledge and a divine call to this sacred
office.

280. Q. How should Christians look upon the priests of the Church?
A. Christians should look upon the priests of the Church as the
messengers of God and the dispensers of His mysteries.

281. Q. Who can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders?
A. Bishops can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders.



LESSON TWENTY-SIXTH
ON MATRIMONY


282. Q. What is the Sacrament of Matrimony?
A. The Sacrament of Matrimony is the Sacrament which unites a Christian
man and woman in lawful marriage.

283. Q. Can a Christian man and woman be united in lawful marriage in
any other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony?
A. A Christian man and woman cannot be united in lawful marriage in any
other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony, because Christ raised
marriage to the dignity of a Sacrament.

284. Q. Can the bond of Christian marriage be dissolved by any human
power?
A. The bond of Christian marriage cannot be dissolved by any human
power.

285. Q. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony?
A. The effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony are: 1st, To sanctify the
love of husband and wife; 2d, To give them grace to bear with each
other's weaknesses; 3d, To enable them to bring up their children in the
fear and love of God.

286. Q. To receive the Sacrament of matrimony worthily is it necessary
to be in the state of grace?
A. To receive the Sacrament of Matrimony worthily it is necessary to be
in the state of grace, and it is necessary also to comply with the laws
of the Church.

287. Q. Who has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament of
marriage?
A. The Church alone has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament
of marriage, though the state also has the right to make laws concerning
the civil effects of the marriage contract.

288. Q. Does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons
who have a different religion or no religion at all?
A. The Church does forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who
have a different religion or no religion at all.

289. Q. Why does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with
persons who have a different religion or no religion at all?
A. The Church forbids the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a
different religion or no religion at all, because such marriages
generally lead to indifference, loss of faith, and to the neglect of the
religious education of the children.

290. Q. Why do many marriages prove unhappy?
A. Many marriages prove unhappy because they are entered into hastily
and without worthy motives.

291. Q. How should Christians prepare for a holy and happy marriage?
A. Christians should prepare for a holy and happy marriage by receiving
the Sacraments of Penance and Holy Eucharist; by begging God to grant
them a pure intention and to direct their choice; and by seeking the
advice of their parents and the blessing of their pastors.



LESSON TWENTY-SEVENTH
ON THE SACRAMENTALS


292. Q. What is a sacramental?
A. A sacramental is anything set apart or blessed by the Church to
excite good thoughts and to increase devotion, and through these
movements of the heart to remit venial sin.

293. Q. What is the difference between the Sacraments and the
sacramentals?
A. The difference between the Sacraments and the sacramentals is: 1st,
The Sacraments were instituted by Jesus Christ and the sacramentals were
instituted by the Church; 2d, The Sacraments give grace of themselves
when we place no obstacle in the way; the sacramentals excite in us
pious dispositions, by means of which we may obtain grace.

294. Q. Which is the chief sacramental used in the Church?
A. The chief sacramental used in the Church is the sign of the Cross.

295. Q. How do we make the sign of the Cross?
A. We make the sign of the Cross by putting the right hand to the
forehead, then on the breast, and then to the left and right shoulders,
saying, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

296. Q. Why do we make the sign of the Cross?
A. We make the sign of the Cross to show that we are Christians and to
profess our belief in the chief mysteries of our religion.

297. Q. How is the sign of the Cross a profession of faith in the chief
mysteries of our religion?
A. The sign of the Cross is a profession of faith in the chief mysteries
of our religion because it expresses the mysteries of the Unity and
Trinity of God and of the Incarnation and death of our Lord.

298. Q. How does the sign of the Cross express the mystery of the Unity
and Trinity of God?
A. The words, In the name, express the Unity of God; the words that
follow, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, express
the mystery of the Trinity.

299. Q. How does the sign of the Cross express the mystery of the
Incarnation and death of our Lord?
A. The sign of the Cross expresses the mystery of the Incarnation by
reminding us that the Son of God, having become man, suffered death on
the cross.

300. Q. What other sacramental is in very frequent use?
A. Another sacramental in very frequent use is holy water.

301. Q. What is holy water?
A. Holy water is water blessed by the priest with solemn prayer to beg
God's blessing on those who use it, and protection from the powers of
darkness.

302. Q. Are there other sacramentals besides the sign of the Cross and
holy water?
A. Besides the sign of the Cross and holy water there are many other
sacramentals, such as blessed candles, ashes, palms, crucifixes, images
of the Blessed Virgin and of the saints, rosaries, and scapulars.



LESSON TWENTY-EIGHTH
ON PRAYER


303. Q. Is there any other means of obtaining God's grace than the
Sacraments?
A. There is another means of obtaining God's grace, and it is prayer.

304. Q. What is prayer?
A. Prayer is the lifting up of our minds and hearts to God to adore Him,
to thank Him for His benefits, to ask His forgiveness, and to beg of Him
all the graces we need whether for soul or body.

305. Q. Is prayer necessary to salvation?
A. Prayer is necessary to salvation, and without it no one having the
use of reason can be saved.

306. Q. At what particular times should we pray?
A. We should pray particularly on Sundays and holydays, every morning
and night, in all dangers, temptations, and afflictions.

307. Q. How should we pray?
A. We should pray: 1st, With attention; 2d, With a sense of our own
helplessness and dependence upon God; 3d, With a great desire for the
graces we beg of God; 4th, With trust in God's goodness; 5th, With
perseverance.

308. Q. Which are the prayers most recommended to us?
A. The prayers most recommended to us are the Lord's Prayer, the Hail
Mary, the Apostles' Creed, the Confiteor, and the Acts of Faith, Hope,
Love, and Contrition.

309. Q. Are prayers said with distractions of any avail?
A. Prayers said with wilful distractions are of no avail.



LESSON TWENTY-NINTH
ON THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD


310. Q. Is it enough to belong to God's Church in order to be saved?
A. It is not enough to belong to the Church in order to be saved, but we
must also keep the Commandments of God and of the Church.

311. Q. Which are the Commandments that contain the whole law of God?
A. The Commandments which contain the whole law of God are these two:
1st, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, with thy
whole soul, with thy whole strength, and with thy whole mind; 2d, Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

312. Q. Why do these two Commandments of the love of God and of our
neighbor contain the whole law of God?
A. These two Commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain
the whole law of God because all the other Commandments are given either
to help us to keep these two, or to direct us how to shun what is
opposed to them.

313. Q. Which are the Commandments of God?
A. The Commandments of God are these ten.

 1. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
    out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt not have strange gods before
    Me. Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness
    of anything that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor of
    those things that are in the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not
    adore them, nor serve them.
 2. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
 3. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.
 4. Honor thy father and thy mother.
 5. Thou shalt not kill.
 6. Thou shalt not commit adultery.
 7. Thou shalt not steal.
 8. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
 9. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.
10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.

314. Q. Who gave the Ten Commandments?
A. God Himself gave the Ten Commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai, and
Christ our Lord confirmed them.



LESSON THIRTIETH
ON THE FIRST COMMANDMENT


315. Q. What is the first Commandment?
A. The first Commandment is: I am the Lord thy God: thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me.

316. Q. How does the first Commandment help us to keep the great
Commandment of the love of God?
A. The first Commandment helps us to keep the great Commandment of the
love of God because it commands us to adore God alone.

317. Q. How do we adore God?
A. We adore God by faith, hope, and charity, by prayer and sacrifice.

318. Q. How may the first Commandment be broken?
A. The first Commandment may be broken by giving to a creature the honor
which belongs to God alone; by false worship; and by attributing to a
creature a perfection which belongs to God alone.

319. Q. Do those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in
dreams, in mediums, spiritists, fortune-tellers, and the like, sin
against the first Commandment?
A. Those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in dreams, in
mediums, spiritists, fortunetellers and the like, sin against the first
Commandment, because they attribute to creatures perfections which
belong to God alone.

320. Q. Are sins against faith, hope and charity also sins against the
first Commandment?
A. Sins against faith, hope, and charity are also sins against the first
Commandment.

321. Q. How does a person sin against faith?
A. A person sins against faith: 1st, by not trying to know what God has
taught; 2d, by refusing to believe all that God has taught; 3d, by
neglecting to profess his belief in what God has taught.

322. Q. How do we fail to try to know what God has taught?
A. We fail to try to know what God has taught by neglecting to learn the
Christian doctrine.

323. Q. Who are they who do not believe all that God has taught?
A. They who do not believe all that God has taught are the heretics and
infidels.

324. Q. Who are they who neglect to profess their belief in what God has
taught?
A. They who neglect to profess their belief in what God has taught are
all those who fail to acknowledge the true Church in which they really
believe.

325. Q. Can they who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in
which they believe expect to be saved while in that state?
A. They who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in which they
believe cannot expect to be saved while in that state, for Christ has
said: "Whoever shall deny Me before men, I will also deny him before My
Father who is in heaven."

326. Q. Are we obliged to make open profession of our faith?
A. We are obliged to make open profession of our faith as often as God's
honor, our neighbor's spiritual good, or our own requires it.
"Whosoever," says Christ, "shall confess Me before men, I will also
confess him before My Father who is in heaven."

327. Q. Which are the sins against hope?
A. The sins against hope are presumption and despair.

328. Q. What is presumption?
A. Presumption is a rash expectation of salvation without making proper
use of the necessary means to obtain it.

329. Q. What is despair?
A. Despair is the loss of hope in God's mercy.

330. Q. How do we sin against the love of God?
A. We sin against the love of God by all sin, but particularly by mortal
sin.



LESSON THIRTY-FIRST
THE FIRST COMMANDMENT--ON THE HONOR AND INVOCATION OF SAINTS


331. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid the honoring of the saints?
A. The first Commandment does not forbid the honoring of the saints, but
rather approves of it; because by honoring the saints, who are the
chosen friends of God, we honor God Himself.

332. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid us to pray to the saints?
A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to pray to the saints.

333. Q. What do we mean by praying to the saints?
A. By praying to the saints we mean the asking of their help and
prayers.

334. Q. How do we know that the saints hear us?
A. We know that the saints hear us, because they are with God, who makes
our prayers known to them.

335. Q. Why do we believe that the saints will help us?
A. We believe that the saints will help us because both they and we are
members of the same Church, and they love us as their brethren.

336. Q. How are the saints and we members of the same Church?
A. The saints and we are members of the same Church, because the Church
in heaven and the Church on earth are one and the same Church, and all
its members are in communion with one another.

337. Q. What is the communion of the members of the Church called?
A. The communion of the members of the Church is called the communion of
saints.

338. Q. What does the communion of saints mean?
A. The communion of saints means the union which exists between the
members of the Church on earth with one another, and with the blessed in
heaven and with the suffering souls in purgatory.

339. Q. What benefits are derived from the communion of saints?
A. The following benefits are derived from the communion of saints:--the
faithful on earth assist one another by their prayers and good works,
and they are aided by the intercession of the saints in heaven, while
both the saints in heaven and the faithful on earth help the souls in
purgatory.

340. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid us to honor relics?
A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to honor relics, because
relics are the bodies of the saints, or objects directly connected with
them or with our Lord.

341. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid the making of images?
A. The first Commandment does forbid the making of images if they are
made to be adored as gods, but it does not forbid the making of them to
put us in mind of Jesus Christ, His Blessed Mother, and the saints.

342. Q. Is it right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ
and His saints?
A. It is right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ and
His saints, because they are the representations and memorials of them.

343. Q. Is it allowed to pray to the crucifix or to the images and
relics of the saints?
A. It is not allowed to pray to the crucifix or images and relics of the
saints, for they have no life, nor power to help us, nor sense to hear
us.

344. Q. Why do we pray before the crucifix and the images and relics of
the saints?
A. We pray before the crucifix and images and relics of the saints
because they enliven our devotion by exciting pious affections and
desires, and by reminding us of Christ and of the saints, that we may
imitate their virtues.



LESSON THIRTY-SECOND
FROM THE SECOND TO THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT


345. Q. What is the second Commandment?
A. The second Commandment is: Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain.

346. Q. What are we commanded by the second Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the second Commandment to speak with reverence of
God and of the saints, and of all holy things, and to keep our lawful
oaths and vows.

347. Q. What is an oath?
A. An oath is the calling upon God to witness the truth of what we say.

348. Q. When may we take an oath?
A. We may take an oath when it is ordered by lawful authority or
required for God's honor or for our own or our neighbor's good.

349. Q. What is necessary to make an oath lawful?
A. To make an oath lawful it is necessary that what we swear to, be
true, and that there be a sufficient cause for taking an oath.

350. Q. What is a vow?
A. A vow is a deliberate promise made to God to do something that is
pleasing to Him.

351. Q. Is it a sin not to fulfill our vows?
A. Not to fulfill our vows is a sin, mortal or venial, according to the
nature of the vow and the intention we had in making it.

352. Q. What is forbidden by the second Commandment?
A. The second Commandment forbids all false, rash, unjust, and
unnecessary oaths, blasphemy, cursing, and profane words.

353. Q. What is the third Commandment?
A. The third Commandment is: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

354. Q. What are we commanded by the third Commandment?
A. By the third Commandment we are commanded to keep holy the Lord's day
and the holydays of obligation, on which we are to give our time to the
service and worship of God.

355. Q. How are we to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation?
A. We are to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation by
hearing Mass, by prayer, and by other good works.

356. Q. Are the Sabbath day and the Sunday the same?
A. The Sabbath day and the Sunday are not the same. The Sabbath is the
seventh day of the week, and is the day which was kept holy in the Old
Law; the Sunday is the first day of the week, and is the day which is
kept holy in the New Law.

357. Q. Why does the Church command us to keep the Sunday holy instead
of the Sabbath?
A. The Church commands us to keep the Sunday holy instead of the Sabbath
because on Sunday Christ rose from the dead, and on Sunday He sent the
Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.

358. Q. What is forbidden by the third Commandment?
A. The third Commandment forbids all unnecessary servile work and
whatever else may hinder the due observance of the Lord's day.

359. Q. What are servile works?
A. Servile works are those which require labor rather of body than of
mind.

360. Q. Are servile works on Sunday ever lawful?
A. Servile works are lawful on Sunday when the honor of God, the good of
our neighbor, or necessity requires them.



LESSON THIRTY-THIRD
FROM THE FOURTH TO THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT


361. Q. What is the fourth Commandment?
A. The fourth Commandment is: Honor thy father and thy mother.

362. Q. What are we commanded by the fourth Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the fourth Commandment to honor, love, and obey
our parents in all that is not sin.

363. Q. Are we bound to honor and obey others than our parents?
A. We are also bound to honor and obey our bishops, pastors,
magistrates, teachers, and other lawful superiors.

364. Q. Have parents and superiors any duties towards those who are
under their charge?
A. It is the duty of parents and superiors to take good care of all
under their charge and give them proper direction and example.

365. Q. What is forbidden by the fourth Commandment?
A. The fourth Commandment forbids all disobedience, contempt, and
stubbornness towards our parents or lawful superiors.

366. Q. What is the fifth Commandment?
A. The fifth Commandment is: Thou shalt not kill.

367. Q. What are we commanded by the fifth Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the fifth Commandment to live in peace and union
with our neighbor, to respect his rights, to seek his spiritual and
bodily welfare, and to take proper care of our own life and health.

368. Q. What is forbidden by the fifth Commandment?
A. The fifth Commandment forbids all wilful murder, fighting, anger,
hatred, revenge, and bad example.

369. Q. What is the sixth Commandment?
A. The sixth Commandment is: Thou shalt not commit adultery.

370. Q. What are we commanded by the sixth Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the sixth Commandment to be pure in thought and
modest in all our looks, words, and actions.

371. Q. What is forbidden by the sixth Commandment?
A. The sixth commandment forbids all unchaste freedom with another's
wife or husband; also all immodesty with ourselves or others in looks,
dress, words, or actions.

372. Q. Does the sixth Commandment forbid the reading of bad and
immodest books and newspapers?
A. The sixth Commandment does forbid the reading of bad and immodest
books and newspapers.



LESSON THIRTY-FOURTH
FROM THE SEVENTH TO THE END OF THE TENTH COMMANDMENT


373. Q. What is the seventh Commandment?
A. The seventh Commandment is: Thou shalt not steal.

374. Q. What are we commanded by the seventh Commandment?
A. By the seventh Commandment we are commanded to give to all men what
belongs to them and to respect their property.

375. Q. What is forbidden by the seventh Commandment?
A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unjust taking or keeping what
belongs to another.

376. Q. Are we bound to restore ill-gotten goods?
A. We are bound to restore ill-gotten goods, or the value of them, as
far as we are able; otherwise we cannot be forgiven.

377. Q. Are we obliged to repair the damage we have unjustly caused?
A. We are bound to repair the damage we have unjustly caused.

378. Q. What is the eighth Commandment?
A. The eighth Commandment is: Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbor.

379. Q. What are we commanded by the eighth Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the eighth Commandment to speak the truth in all
things and to be careful of the honor and reputation of every one.

380. Q. What is forbidden by the eighth Commandment?
A. The eighth Commandment forbids all rash judgments, backbiting,
slanders, and lies.

381. Q. What must they do who have lied about their neighbor and
seriously injured his character?
A. They who have lied about their neighbor and seriously injured his
character must repair the injury done as far as they are able, otherwise
they will not be forgiven.

382. Q. What is the ninth Commandment?
A. The ninth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.

383. Q. What are we commanded by the ninth Commandment?
A. We are commanded by the ninth Commandment to keep ourselves pure in
thought and desire.

384. Q. What is forbidden by the ninth Commandment?
A. The ninth Commandment forbids unchaste thoughts, desires of another's
wife or husband, and all other unlawful impure thoughts and desires.

385. Q. Are impure thoughts and desires always sins?
A. Impure thoughts and desires are always sins, unless they displease us
and we try to banish them.

386. Q. What is the tenth Commandment?
A. The tenth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.

387. Q. What are we commanded by the tenth Commandment?
A. By the tenth Commandment we are commanded to be content with what we
have, and to rejoice in our neighbor's welfare.

388. Q. What is forbidden by the tenth Commandment?
A. The tenth Commandment forbids all desires to take or keep wrongfully
what belongs to another.



LESSON THIRTY-FIFTH
ON THE FIRST AND SECOND COMMANDMENTS OF THE CHURCH


389. Q. Which are the chief commandments of the Church?
A. The chief commandments of the Church are six:

1. To hear Mass on Sundays and holydays of obligation.
2. To fast and abstain on the days appointed.
3. To confess at least once a year.
4. To receive the Holy Eucharist during the Easter time.
5. To contribute to the support of our pastors.
6. Not to marry persons who are not Catholics, or who are related to us
   within the third degree of kindred, nor privately without witnesses,
   nor to solemnize marriage at forbidden times.

390. Q. Is it a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of
obligation?
A. It is a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of
obligation, unless we are excused for a serious reason. They also commit
a mortal sin who, having others under their charge, hinder them from
hearing Mass, without a sufficient reason.

391. Q. Why were holydays instituted by the Church?
A. Holydays were instituted by the Church to recall to our minds the
great mysteries of religion and the virtues and rewards of the saints.

392. Q. How should we keep the holydays of obligation?
A. We should keep the holydays of obligation as we should keep the
Sunday.

393. Q. What do you mean by fast-days?
A. By fast-days I mean days on which we are allowed but one full meal.

394. Q. What do you mean by days of abstinence?
A. By days of abstinence I mean days on which we are forbidden to eat
flesh-meat, but are allowed the usual number of meals.

395. Q. Why does the Church command us to fast and abstain?
A. The Church commands us to fast and abstain, in order that we may
mortify our passions and satisfy for our sins.

396. Q. Why does the Church command us to abstain from flesh-meat on
Fridays?
A. The Church commands us to abstain from flesh-meat on Fridays, in
honor of the day on which our Saviour died.



LESSON THIRTY-SIXTH
ON THE THIRD, FOURTH, FIFTH AND SIXTH COMMANDMENTS OF THE CHURCH


397. Q. What is meant by the command of confessing at least once a year?
A. By the command of confessing at least once a year is meant that we
are obliged, under pain of mortal sin, to go to confession within the
year.

398. Q. Should we confess only once a year?
A. We should confess frequently, if we wish to lead a good life.

399. Q. Should children go to Confession?
A. Children should go to Confession when they are old enough to commit
sin, which is commonly about the age of seven years.

400. Q. What sin does he commit who neglects to receive Communion during
the Easter time?
A. He who neglects to receive Communion during the Easter time commits a
mortal sin.

401. Q. What is the Easter time?
A. The Easter time is, in this country, the time between the first
Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday.

402. Q. Are we obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors?
A. We are obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors, and to
bear our share in the expenses of the church and school.

403. Q. What is the meaning of the commandment not to marry within the
third degree of kindred?
A. The meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree
of kindred is that no one is allowed to marry another within the third
degree of blood relationship.

404. Q. What is the meaning of the command not to marry privately?
A. The command not to marry privately means that none should marry
without the blessing of God's priests or without witnesses.

405. Q. What is the meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at
forbidden times?
A. The meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden
times is that during Lent and Advent the marriage ceremony should not be
performed with pomp or a nuptial Mass.

406. Q. What is the nuptial Mass?
A. A nuptial Mass is a Mass appointed by the Church to invoke a special
blessing upon the married couple.

407. Q. Should Catholics be married at a nuptial Mass?
A. Catholics should be married at a nuptial Mass, because they thereby
show greater reverence for the holy Sacrament and bring richer blessings
upon their wedded life.



LESSON THIRTY-SEVENTH
ON THE LAST JUDGMENT AND THE RESURRECTION, HELL, PURGATORY, AND HEAVEN


408. Q. When will Christ judge us?
A. Christ will judge us immediately after our death, and on the last
day.

409. Q. What is the judgment called which we have to undergo immediately
after death?
A. The judgment we have to undergo immediately after death is called the
Particular Judgment.

410. Q. What is the judgment called which all men have to undergo on the
last day?
A. The judgment which all men have to undergo on the last day is called
the General Judgment.

411. Q. Why does Christ judge men immediately after death?
A. Christ judges men immediately after death to reward or punish them
according to their deeds.

412. Q. What are the rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls
after the Particular Judgment?
A. The rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls after the
Particular Judgment are Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell.

413. Q. What is Hell?
A. Hell is a state to which the wicked are condemned, and in which they
are deprived of the sight of God for all eternity, and are in dreadful
torments.

414. Q. What is Purgatory?
A. Purgatory is a state in which those suffer for a time who die guilty
of venial sins, or without having satisfied for the punishment due to
their sins.

415. Q. Can the faithful on earth help the souls in Purgatory?
A. The faithful on earth can help the souls in Purgatory by their
prayers, fasts, alms-deeds; by indulgences, and by having Masses said
for them.

416. Q. If every one is judged immediately after death, what need is
there of a General Judgment?
A. There is need of a General Judgment, though every one is judged
immediately after death, that the providence of God, which, on earth,
often permits the good to suffer and the wicked to prosper, may in the
end appear just before all men.

417. Q. Will our bodies share in the reward or punishment of our souls?
A. Our bodies will share in the reward or punishment of our souls,
because through the resurrection they will again be united to them.

418. Q. In what state will the bodies of the just rise?
A. The bodies of the just will rise glorious and immortal.

419. Q. Will the bodies of the damned also rise?
A. The bodies of the damned will also rise, but they will be condemned
to eternal punishment.

420. Q. What is Heaven?
A. Heaven is the state of everlasting life in which we see God face to
face, are made like unto Him in glory, and enjoy eternal happiness.

421. Q. What words should we bear always in mind?
A. We should bear always in mind these words of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ: "What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world and
suffer the loss of his own soul, or what exchange shall a man give for
his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with
His angels; and then will He render to every man according to his
works."




MORNING PRAYERS


As soon as you awake, think of God. Make the Sign of the Cross and say:

+ In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

Then dress quickly and kneel down. Now say the Our Father, the Hail
Mary, the Apostles' Creed, the Confiteor and the Acts of Faith, Hope,
Love and Contrition which you have probably memorized. If you do not
know them by heart you will find them on pages 2-4.

Then if you have time also say the following prayers:

TO THE BLESSED VIRGIN.
My Lady, and my Mother, remember I am thine; protect and defend me as
thy property and possession.

TO SAINT JOSEPH.
Saint Joseph, model and patron of those who love the Sacred Heart of
Jesus, pray for us.

TO THE GUARDIAN ANGEL.
Angel of God, my guardian dear,
To whom His love commits me here,
Ever this day be at my side,
To light and guard, to rule and guide. Amen.

God bless Papa and Mamma. God bless Brothers and Sisters, and all my
friends. God bless me, and make me a good child.

FOR THE FAITHFUL DEPARTED.
Eternal rest give unto them, O Lord. And let perpetual light shine upon
them. May they rest in peace. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was
in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Make the Sign of the Cross.



EVENING PRAYERS


Never go to bed without thanking God for all the benefits you have
received during the day and during your whole life. Kneel down. Make the
Sign of the Cross. Then say the Our Father, Hail Mary, the Apostles'
Creed, the Confiteor, and Glory be.

Now think how you have acted during the day. Are there any big sins on
your soul? Any little sins? Try to tell Jesus how sorry you are for all
your sins, and say the Act of Contrition (page 4).

Jesus, Mary, Joseph, I give you my heart and my soul.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph, assist me in my last agony.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph, may I breathe forth my soul in peace with you.
O my God, bless my father, mother, and all my relatives and friends.
May the souls of the faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest
in peace. Amen.

Bless yourself with holy water.

+ In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.



PRAYERS FOR MASS


[The Mass prayers are an arrangement of those contained in Father Finn's
"Prayer Book for Catholic Youth" (also known as Father Finn's Boys' and
Girls' Prayer Book). They follow closely in simplified language the
spirit and liturgy of the "Ordinary of the Mass," so that children will
become readily accustomed to using the Church's own prayers and follow
the priest at the altar. The rubrics when to sit, stand or kneel at Low
Mass are given.

If it is found desirable to have the children recite prayers aloud and
in unison at Mass, certain parts suitable for this purpose are marked
with an asterisk (*).]


Remember that the church is the house of God, where the living God
dwells. And where God is, His holy angels too are present. In church,
therefore, be reverent and modest in your behavior, and always be in
time. When you enter, bless yourself with holy water and go quietly to
your seat, genuflect on your right knee and enter the pew.


PRAYER BEFORE MASS

O my God, I am only a child; help me to be attentive, and to pray with
all my heart during this holy Mass.

The priest comes out to begin Mass.

Stand

The priest carries in his hands the chalice, covered with a cloth. The
priest goes up to the middle of the altar, and sets down the chalice.
Then he goes to the right side and opens the book.

After that he comes down to the foot of the altar, and makes the Sign of
the Cross.


THE MASS OF THE CATECHUMENS
(From the Beginning to the Offertory)

Kneel

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
*I will go in to the altar of God, to God Who gives joy to my youth.
*Judge me, O God. Keep me safe from all evil.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.
I will go in to the altar of God.
To God Who gives joy to my youth.

Here the priest makes the Sign of the Cross.

Our help is in the name of the Lord.
Who made heaven and earth.

The priest, bowing down, says the Confiteor. Then the altar-boys bow and
say it after him. Read it as on p. 2.

The priest goes up to the altar and says:

O Lord, we beg You, by the goodness of Your saints whose relics are
here, and of all Your saints, to forgive us all our sins.


THE INTROIT AND KYRIE ELEISON

The priest goes to the right side of the altar and reads from the book.
Then going back to the middle of the altar he says the Kyrie Eleison.


THE GLORIA

Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of good will. We
praise You. We bless You. We glorify You. We give You thanks for Your
great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father almighty. O Lord
God, Son of the Father, Who take away the sins of the world, have mercy
on us. You only, O Jesus Christ, with the Holy Ghost, are most high in
the Glory of God the Father. Amen.

The priest turns to the people and says:

The Lord be with you.
And with your spirit.


THE COLLECT

The priest goes to the right side of the altar and reads from the book.

*Let us pray: Let Your grace and pity guide our hearts, we beg You, O
Lord. For without You we cannot please You. Through Our Lord, Jesus
Christ, Your Son, Who lives and reigns with You in the unity of the Holy
Ghost, world without end. Amen.


THE EPISTLE

The Epistle is a letter. Most of these letters were written by Saint
Paul. The priest now reads one of these. You may read the following:

Dear children: Be happy, be good, be brave; agree with one another, and
be at peace. The grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, God's love, and the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

Thanks be to God.

The altar-boy carries the book to the left side of the altar. The priest
bows at the middle of the altar and says a prayer.


THE GOSPEL

The priest goes to the left and reads from the book.

Stand

While Jesus was speaking to the people, mothers brought their children
to Him, that He might bless them. The disciples told them not to bother
Jesus. But Jesus said, "Suffer the little children to come to Me and
forbid them not. For of such is the kingdom of heaven." And Jesus
blessed the children.

Praise be to You, O Christ.

Sit

The priest now turns back to the middle of the altar and says the Creed.
You also say it (see page 2).


THE MASS OF THE FAITHFUL
(From the Offertory to the Communion)


THE OFFERING OF THE HOST

The priest takes the cloth off the chalice. Then he holds up a small
gold plate on which is the bread, called the host.

*Take, O holy Father, almighty and eternal God, this spotless host which
I, Your unworthy servant, offer to You for my many sins and for all who
serve You, living and dead. May it help them and me to gain eternal
life.

The priest goes to the right side of the altar. He pours wine and water
into the chalice. Then the priest goes back to the middle of the altar
and raises the chalice.


THE OFFERING OF THE CHALICE

*We offer You, O Lord, this chalice. May it help us and all the world to
gain eternal life. Amen.

The priest goes to the right side of the altar to wash his hands.

Returning to the middle of the altar, the priest bows down and says some
prayers. Then he turns to the people and says the Orate Fratres.

Now the priest prays in a low voice and then in a louder voice he says
the Preface:

Truly, it is right and just that we should at all times and in all
places give thanks to You, O holy Lord, Father almighty, Who, with Your
only Son and the Holy Ghost are one God, one Lord. All the angels daily
praise You, singing with one voice:


*THE SANCTUS

Holy, holy, holy Lord, God of hosts.
Heaven and earth are full of Your glory.
Hosanna in the highest.

The bell is rung three times.

Kneel


THE CANON

[Note,--By a Decree of the Church (Aug. 4, 1922), the prayers during the
Canon, i.e. from the Sanctus to the Pater Noster, must be said in
silence.]

The priest bows low and kisses the altar.

O most merciful Father, we pray You, through Jesus Christ, Your Son, Our
Lord, to take and bless these gifts. We offer them to You for Your holy
Catholic Church, for our Pope and Bishop and for all those in the
Catholic Faith.


PRAYER FOR THE LIVING

Be mindful, O Lord, of Your servants (name those for whom you wish to
pray especially), and all who are now hearing this Mass. Hear, O Lord,
the prayers they are offering for themselves, their friends and their
families.


THE CONSECRATION OF THE HOST

The priest now bends low over the host and says:

    THIS IS MY BODY

At these words, the bread is changed into the body of Our Lord. The bell
rings. The priest kneels and then raises the Sacred Body of Our Lord.
Now look at the Sacred Host and say: My Lord and my God. Then bow your
head as the priest kneels again.


THE CONSECRATION OF THE WINE

The priest bends over the chalice and says:

    THIS IS THE CHALICE OF MY BLOOD

At these words, the wine becomes the Precious Blood of Our Lord. The
bell rings. The priest kneels and then raises the chalice. Now the
priest continues to pray silently. Look at the chalice and say: Jesus in
the Blessed Sacrament, have mercy on us.

The priest kneels. The bell rings again. The priest prays silently.


PRAYER FOR THE DEAD

Remember also, O Lord, Your servants (here name dead relatives and
friends) who have gone before us with the sign of faith and sleep the
sleep of peace.

Now the priest says the "Pater Noster." Say the "Our Father."

Soon after the priest strikes his breast and says the "Agnus Dei."


THE PRIEST'S COMMUNION

The priest after saying some prayers silently, takes the Sacred Host and
paten in his left hand and striking his breast with the right hand says
(the bell rings three times):

*O Lord, I am not worthy that You should enter under my roof. Say but
the word and my soul shall be healed.

The priest bows down and receives the Body of Our Lord. He remains in
prayer for a short time. Then he uncovers the chalice and drinks the
Sacred Blood of Our Lord.


THE COMMUNION OF THE PEOPLE

The priest now opens the tabernacle and takes out the Blessed Sacrament
to give holy communion to the people. Turning to the people and holding
the ciborium in his left hand, he lifts up a Sacred Host to the people
in his right hand. Now say with the priest three times:

"Lord, I am not worthy that You should enter my soul; say but the word
and my soul shall be healed."


AFTER THE COMMUNION

Having replaced the Blessed Sacrament in the tabernacle, the priest
after taking water and wine, covers the chalice and goes to the right
side of the altar to read from the book. Then going back to the middle
he turns to the people and says:

The Lord be with you.
And with your spirit.

Then the priest again goes to the right side of the altar and reads:


THE PRAYERS AFTER COMMUNION

*Let us pray: We have been filled with Your gifts, O Lord. Grant that
they may make us clean and strong. May the gift of this divine Sacrament
keep us pure, O Lord. Through the help of the Blessed Virgin, of St.
Joseph, of Sts. Peter and Paul and all the saints, may it free us from
all evil.

The priest goes back to the middle of the altar and turning to the
people says:

The Lord be with you.
And with your spirit.

Go, the Mass is ended.
Thanks be to God.


THE BLESSING

The priest bows down and says a prayer. Then turning to the people he
blesses them saying:

May almighty God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless you. Amen.

The priest goes to the left side of the altar.

Stand

The Lord be with you.
And with your spirit.


THE LAST GOSPEL

The priest makes a cross on forehead, lips, and breast, and says the
Gospel of St. John.

Remain standing until the priest has left the sanctuary or kneels down
to say the prayers after Mass.



THE RIGHT MANNER OF CONFESSING


[From Father Finn's Prayer Book for Catholic Youth.]


PRAYER BEFORE EXAMINING YOUR CONSCIENCE

O Holy Spirit, help me to know all my sins. Help me to remember that
Jesus died for me. Help me to make a good confession and I promise that
I will try never to sin again.

Now think of your sins.


PRAYER BEFORE ENTERING THE CONFESSIONAL

O God, I am very sorry for all my sins. I promise that I will try to be
good and never again to hurt You by sin. Dear Jesus, help me. Mother of
God, pray that I may please Your Son by true sorrow for my sins.

When your turn comes, go into the confession box. Make the Sign of the
Cross and wait till the priest opens the little door. Say what you have
been taught to say. Or you may say this:

Bless me, Father, for I have sinned. It is (say how long) since my last
confession. Since then I have committed these sins.

Now tell all your sins and how many times you committed each. If there
is something you don't know how to tell, just say, "Please help me,
Father," and the priest will help you. After you have told all your
sins, say what you have been taught to say. Or you may say:

That is all, Father.

In case you have no big sins to confess, it is well to end your
confession with: "In my past life I sinned through anger or impurity"
(or some sin that you know you did and that you are sorry for).

The priest tells you what prayers to say for a penance. Then he tells
you to say the Act of Contrition. When you come out, kneel down near the
altar. Say your penance at once. Then thank God for being so good to
you.



COMMUNION PRAYERS


ACTS BEFORE COMMUNION

Act of Faith. Jesus Christ, my Sovereign Lord, I firmly believe that
Thou art really present in the Holy Eucharist, and that it is Thy body,
Thy blood, Thy soul, and Thy divinity that I shall receive in that
Adorable Sacrament.

Act of Hope. Thou hast said, O my God, that those hoping in Thee shall
never be confounded. I place all my confidence in Thy promises, and I
hope that, having nourished myself with Thy body on earth, I shall have
the happiness of seeing and possessing Thee eternally in heaven.

Act of Love. O my divine Jesus, Who hast so loved me as to nourish me
with Thy adorable flesh, I love Thee with all my heart and above all
things; I wish to live and die in Thy holy love.

Act of Humility. My Saviour and my God, Thou art all sanctity. I am not
worthy that Thou shouldst enter my heart; yet, speak but the word and my
soul shall be healed.

Act of Desire. My soul desires Thee, O my God! Thou art its joy and
happiness. Come, O divine Jesus, come into my heart; it desires ardently
to receive Thee.


ACTS AFTER COMMUNION

Act of Adoration. I adore Thee, O Jesus, as the Lamb of God immolated
for the salvation of mankind. I join in the profound adoration which the
angels and saints pay to Thee in heaven.

Act of Thanksgiving. Lord, Thou hast looked on my unworthiness. I was
sick, and Thou hast healed me. I was poor, and Thou hast bestowed upon
me Thy numberless benefits. How shall I be able to thank Thee, O my
Lord, for all Thy favors? I will invoke Thy holy name, and eternally
sing Thy mercies.

Act of Offering. What can I offer Thee, O my God, for the grace of
having given Thyself to me? I consecrate to Thy glory my body, my soul,
and all that I possess! Dispose of me according to Thy holy will.

Act of Petition. My divine Redeemer, Thou hast taken possession of me.
Do not let the enemy of my salvation ravish the precious treasure I bear
in my heart. Preserve me from all sin, and defend me against temptation,
that I may persevere until death in the practice of Thy holy law. Amen.



THE ROSARY OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN


THE FIVE JOYFUL MYSTERIES
(Assigned for Mondays and Thursdays throughout the year, the Sundays of
Advent, and after Epiphany until Lent.)

First Mystery. The Annunciation.
Second Mystery. The Visitation.
Third Mystery. The Nativity.
Fourth Mystery. The Presentation.
Fifth Mystery. The Finding of the Child Jesus in the Temple.


THE FIVE SORROWFUL MYSTERIES
(For Tuesdays and Fridays throughout the year, and Sundays in Lent.)

First Mystery. The Prayer and Bloody Sweat of our blessed Saviour in the
Garden.
Second Mystery. The Scourging of Jesus at the Pillar.
Third Mystery. The Crowning of Jesus with Thorns.
Fourth Mystery. Jesus Carrying His Cross.
Fifth Mystery. The Crucifixion.


THE FIVE GLORIOUS MYSTERIES
(For Wednesdays and Saturdays throughout the year, and Sundays after
Easter until after Advent.)

First Mystery. The Resurrection.
Second Mystery. The Ascension.
Third Mystery. The Descent of the Holy Ghost.
Fourth Mystery. The Assumption.
Fifth Mystery. The Crowning of the Blessed Virgin.



THE STATIONS OF THE CROSS


A plenary indulgence can be gained each time one makes the Stations,
subject to the usual conditions.

To make the Stations and gain the indulgences, no special prayer is
required. We have but to begin at the first Station and go around to the
last, thinking devoutly of the Passion and Death of Christ.



HYMNS


Come, Holy Ghost, Creator Blest

1. Come, Holy Ghost, Creator blest,
And in our hearts take up Thy rest;
Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid
|| To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. ||

2. O Comforter, to Thee we cry,
Thou heavenly Gift of God most high,
Thou Fount of life and Fire of love,
|| And sweet Anointing from above. ||

3. Praise we the Father and the Son,
And Holy Spirit with them One;
And may the Son on us bestow
|| The gifts that from the Spirit flow. ||


O Salutaris

1. O Salutaris Hostia!
  Quae coeli pandis ostium:
Bella premunt hostilia,
  Da robur, fer auxilium.

2. Uni trinoque Domino
  Sit sempiterna gloria,
Qui vitam sine termino
  Nobis donet in Patria. Amen.


Tantum Ergo

1. Tantum ergo Sacramentum
  Veneremur cernui;
Et antiquum documentum
  Novo cedat ritui;
Praestet fides supplementum
  Sensuum defectui.

2. Genitori, Genitoque
  Laus et jubilatio,
Salus, honor, virtus quoque
  Sit et benedictio;
Procedenti ab utroque
  Compar sit laudatio. Amen.

V. Panem de coelo praestitisti eis,
R. Omne delectamentum in se habentem.


Adeste Fideles

1. Adeste, fideles,
Laeti triumphantes;
Venite, venite in Bethlehem;
Natum videte
Regem Angelorum,
Venite, adoremus,
Venite, adoremus,
Venite, adoremus Dominum.

2. Deum de Deo,
Lumen de lumine,
Gestant puellae viscera;
Deum verum,
Genitum non factum,
Venite, etc.

3. Cantet nunc Io!
Chorus Angelorum;
Cantet nunc aula coelestium.
Gloria
In excelsis Deo,
Venite, etc.

4. Ergo, qui natus
Die hodierna,
Jesu! tibi sit gloria,
Patris aeterni
Verbum caro factum,
Venite, etc.


Jesus, My Lord, My God
(REV. F. W. FABER)

1. Jesus, my Lord, my God, my all!
  How can I love Thee as I ought?
And how revere this wondrous gift,
  So far surpassing hope or thought?

CHORUS.--Sweet Sacrament! we Thee adore,
Oh, make us love Thee more and more,
Oh, make us love Thee more and more.

2. Had I but Mary's sinless heart
  To love Thee with, my dearest King,
Oh, with what bursts of fervent praise
  Thy goodness, Jesus, would I sing!


To Jesus' Heart All Burning
(REV. A. J. CHRISTIE, S.J.)

1. To Jesus' Heart, all burning
  With fervent love for men,
My heart with fondest yearning
  Shall raise the joyful strain.

CHORUS.--While ages course along,
Blest be with loudest song
|| The Sacred Heart of Jesus
By every heart and tongued. ||

2. O Heart for me on fire
  With love no man can speak,
My yet untold desire
  God gives me for Thy sake.

3. Too true I have forsaken
  Thy flock by wilful sin;
Yet now let me be taken
  Back to Thy fold again.


Jesus, Gentlest Saviour
(REV. F. W. FABER)

1. Jesus, gentlest Saviour!
  God of might and power;
Thou Thyself art dwelling
  In us at this hour.
Nature cannot hold Thee,
  Heav'n is all too strait
For Thine endless glory,
  And Thy royal state.

2. Out beyond the shining
  Of the farthest star,
Thou art ever stretching
  Infinitely far.
Yet the hearts of children
  Hold what worlds cannot,
And the God of wonders
  Loves the lowly spot.


Jesus! Saviour of My Soul

1. Jesus! Saviour of my soul,
  Let me to Thy refuge fly,
While the nearer waters roll,
  While the tempest still is nigh.

CHORUS.--Hide me, O my Saviour, hide
  Till the storm of life is past;
Safe into Thy haven guide,
  O receive my soul at last.
Jesus! Saviour of my soul,
  Let me to Thy refuge fly;
Ave, Ave, Jesus mild,
  Deign to hear Thy lowly child.

2. Other refuge have I none,
  Hangs my helpless soul on Thee,
Leave, oh, leave me not alone,
  Still support and strengthen me.


Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee
(REV. E. CASWALL)

1. Jesus, the very thought of Thee
  With rapture fills my breast;
But sweeter far Thy Face to see,
  And in Thy presence rest.

2. Nor voice can sing, nor heart can frame,
  Nor can the mem'ry find
A sweeter sound than Thy blest Name,
  O Saviour of mankind!

3. Jesus, our only joy be Thou,
  As Thou our prize wilt be;
O Jesus, be our glory now
  And through eternity.


What Happiness Can Equal Mine?
(REV. F. W. FABER)

1. What happiness can equal mine?
  I've found the object of my love:
My Jesus dear, my King Divine,
  Is come to me from heav'n above;
He chose my heart for His abode,
  He there becomes my daily bread;
There on me flows His healing blood;
  There with His flesh my soul is fed.

CHORUS.--What happiness can equal mine?
  I've found the object of my love:
My Jesus dear, my King Divine,
  Is come to me from heav'n above.

2. I am my love's, and He is mine:
  In me He dwells, in Him I live;
What greater treasures could I find?
  And could, ye heavens, a greater give?
O sacred banquet, heav'nly feast!
  O overflowing source of grace,
Where God the food, and man, the guest,
  Meet and unite in sweet embrace!


The Love of Jesus

1. O the priceless love of Jesus:
  O the strength of grace divine;
All His gifts are showered upon me,
  All His blessings may be mine.
He is throned in Heavenly glory
  Where no sin nor death can be;
Yet He loves me in this darkness,
  Yet He does not turn from me.

2. I am blind, and poor, and wretched,
  By temptations sorely tried;
Yet His watchful care abounding
  Keeps me ever at His side.
He is God and King Eternal,
  Higher than all height can be;
Yet His Heart is with me always,
  Yet He stoopeth down to me.


Holy God, We Praise Thy Name
(REV. C. WALWORTH)

1. Holy God, we praise Thy name,
  Lord of all, we bow before Thee!
All on earth Thy sceptre claim,
  All in heav'n above adore Thee.
|| Infinite Thy vast domain,
Everlasting is Thy name. ||

2. Hark! the loud celestial hymn,
  Angel choirs above are raising!
Cherubim and Seraphim,
  In unceasing chorus praising.
|| Fill the heavens with sweet accord;
  Holy! Holy! Holy Lord. ||


Hail, Heavenly Queen!

1. Hail, heavenly Queen! Hail, foamy ocean star!
O be our guide, diffuse thy beams afar;
Hail, Mother of God! above all virgins blest,
Hail, happy gate of heav'n's eternal rest.

CHORUS.--Hail foamy ocean star! Hail, heav'nly Queen!
|| O be our guide to endless joys unseen. ||

2. "Hail, full of grace," with Gabriel we repeat;
Thee, Queen of heav'n, from him we learn to greet;
Then give us peace which heav'n alone can give,
And dead thro' Eve, thro' Mary let us live.


Mother Dear, Oh, Pray for Me

1. Mother dear, oh, pray for me,
  Whilst far from heav'n and thee
I wander in a fragile bark,
  O'er life's tempestuous sea;
O Virgin Mother, from thy throne,
  So bright in bliss above,
Protect thy child and cheer my path,
  With thy sweet smile of love.

CHORUS.--Mother dear, remember me,
  And never cease thy care,
Till in heaven eternally
  Thy love and bliss I share.

2. Mother dear, oh, pray for me,
  Should pleasure's siren lay
E'er tempt thy child to wander far
  From virtue's path away;
When thorns beset life's devious way,
  And darkling waters flow,
Then, Mary, aid thy weeping child,
  Thyself a mother show.


Ora Pro Me

1. Ave Maria! bright and pure,
  Hear, O hear me when I pray,
Pains and pleasures try the pilgrim
  On his long and dreary way.
Fears and perils are around me,
Ave Maria! bright and pure,
  Ore pro me, ora pro me.

2. Ave Maria! Queen of Heaven,
  Teach, O teach me to obey,
Lead me on, tho' fierce temptations
  Stand and meet me in the way.
When I fail and faint, my Mother,
Ave Maria! bright and pure,
  Ora pro me, ora pro me.


I'll Sing a Hymn to Mary
(REV. FR. WYSE)

I'll sing a hymn to Mary,
  The Mother of my God,
The Virgin of all Virgins,
  Of David's royal blood.
Oh, teach me, holy Mary
  A loving song to frame,
When wicked men blaspheme thee
  To love and bless thy name.

When troubles dark afflict me
  In sorrow and in care,
Thy light doth ever guide me
  O beauteous Morning Star.
Lo, I'll be ever ready
  Thy goodly help to claim,
When wicked men blaspheme thee
  I'll love and bless thy name.


Daily, Daily Sing to Mary

1. Daily, daily sing to Mary
  Sing, my soul, her praises due;
All her feasts, her actions worship,
  With the heart's devotion true.
Lost in wond'ring contemplation,
  Be her majesty confess'd;
Call her Mother, call her Virgin,
  Happy Mother, Virgin blest.

2. She is mighty to deliver;
  Call her, trust her lovingly;
When the tempest rages round thee,
  She will calm the troubled sea.
Gifts of heaven she has given,
  Noble Lady, to our race;
She the Queen who decks her subject,
  With the light of God's own grace.


Hymn to St. Joseph

1. With grateful hearts we breathe to-day
  The tender accents of our love.
We carol forth a little lay
  To thee, great saint in heaven above.

CHORUS.--O Joseph dear, from thy bright throne,
  Incline thine ear unto our prayer.
And o'er us all as o'er thine own,
  Extend thy fond paternal care,
And o'er us all as o'er thine own,
  Extend thy fond paternal care,
Extend thy fond paternal care.

2. More favored than earth's greatest king.
  Thou wert the guardian of that Child,
Around whose crib full choirs did sing,
  With cadenced voices soft and mild.


Dear Guardian of Mary
(REV. F. W. FABER)

1. Dear Guardian of Mary! dear nurse of her child!
Life's ways are full weary, the desert is wild;
Bleak sands are all round us, no home can we see;
Sweet Spouse of our Lady! we lean upon thee.

2. For thou to the pilgrim art father and guide,
And Jesus and Mary felt safe at thy side;
Ah! blessed Saint Joseph, how safe should I be,
Sweet Spouse of our Lady! if thou wert with me.


Dear Angel, Ever at My Side
(REV. F. W. FABER)

1. Dear Angel, ever at my side,
  How loving must thou be,
To leave thy home in heaven to guide
  A little child like me.

2. Thy beautiful and shining face
  I see not, though so near;
The sweetness of thy soft, low voice
  I am too deaf to hear.


Hymn at the Communion

O Lord, I am not worthy
  That Thou shouldst come to me,
But speak the words of comfort,
  My spirit healed shall be.

And humbly I'll receive Thee,
  The bridegroom of my soul,
No more by sin to grieve Thee,
  Or fly Thy sweet control.





End of Project Gutenberg's Baltimore Catechism No. 2 (of 4), by Anonymous

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 14552 ***
eIehe Project Gutenberg EBook of An Essay on Slavery and Abolitionism, by
Catharine E. Beecher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: An Essay on Slavery and Abolitionism
       With reference to the duty of American females

Author: Catharine E. Beecher

Release Date: July 25, 2008 [EBook #26123]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAY - SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM ***




Produced by K Nordquist, Emanuela Piasentini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









    +-------------------------------------------------------------+
    |Transcriber's Note:                                          |
    |                                                             |
    |The adjective 'Christian' is sometimes spelled 'christian'   |
    |and its use is inconsistent throughout the book. The original|
    |punctuation, language and spelling have been retained, except|
    |where noted at the end of the text.                          |
    +-------------------------------------------------------------+




                                AN ESSAY


                                   ON


                        SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM,


                          WITH REFERENCE TO THE


                        DUTY OF AMERICAN FEMALES.


                                   BY

                          CATHARINE E. BEECHER.


                             Philadelphia:
                   HENRY PERKINS, 134 CHESTNUT STREET.
                        PERKINS & MARVIN, BOSTON.


                                 1837.


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1837, by _Henry
Perkins_, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the Eastern
District of Pennsylvania.

                      L. ASHMEAD AND CO. PRINTERS.




PREFACE.


THE following are the circumstances which occasioned the succeeding
pages. A gentleman and a friend, requested the writer to assign reasons
why he should not join the Abolition Society. While preparing a reply
to this request, MISS GRIMKE's Address was presented, and the
information communicated, of her intention to visit the North, for the
purpose of using her influence among northern ladies to induce them to
unite with Abolition Societies. The writer then began a private letter
to Miss Grimke as a personal friend. But by the wishes and advice of
others, these two efforts were finally combined in the following Essay,
to be presented to the public.

The honoured and beloved name which that lady bears, so associated as it
is at the South, North, and West, with all that is elegant in a scholar,
refined in a gentleman, and elevated in a Christian,--the respectable
sect with which she is connected,--the interesting effusions of her
pen,--and her own intellectual and moral worth, must secure respect for
her opinions and much personal influence. This seems to be a sufficient
apology for presenting to the public some considerations in connexion
with her name; considerations which may exhibit in another aspect the
cause she advocates, and which it may be appropriate to consider. As
such, they are respectfully commended to the public, and especially to
that portion of it for which they are particularly designed.




ESSAY

ON

SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM.

ADDRESSED TO MISS A. D. GRIMKE.


MY DEAR FRIEND,

Your public address to Christian females at the South has reached me,
and I have been urged to aid in circulating it at the North. I have also
been informed, that you contemplate a tour, during the ensuing year, for
the purpose of exerting your influence to form Abolition Societies among
ladies of the non-slave-holding States.

Our acquaintance and friendship give me a claim to your private ear; but
there are reasons why it seems more desirable to address you, who now
stand before the public as an advocate of Abolition measures, in a more
public manner.

The object I have in view, is to present some reasons why it seems
unwise and inexpedient for ladies of the non-slave-holding States to
unite themselves in Abolition Societies; and thus, at the same time,
to exhibit the inexpediency of the course you propose to adopt.

I would first remark, that your public address leads me to infer, that
you are not sufficiently informed in regard to the feelings and opinions
of Christian females at the North. Your remarks seem to assume, that the
_principles_ held by Abolitionists on the subject of slavery, are
peculiar to them, and are not generally adopted by those at the North
who oppose their _measures_. In this you are not correctly informed. In
the sense in which Abolitionists explain the terms they employ, there is
little, if any, difference between them and most northern persons.
Especially is this true of northern persons of religious principles. I
know not where to look for northern Christians, who would deny that
every slave-holder is bound to treat his slaves exactly as he would
claim that his own children ought to be treated in similar
circumstances; that the holding of our fellow men as property, or the
withholding any of the rights of freedom, for mere purposes of gain, is
a sin, and ought to be immediately abandoned; and that where the laws
are such, that a slave-holder cannot _legally_ emancipate his slaves,
without throwing them into worse bondage, he is bound to use all his
influence to alter those laws, and, in the meantime, to treat his slaves,
as nearly as he can, _as if_ they were free.

I do not suppose there is one person in a thousand, at the North, who
would dissent from these principles. They would only differ in the use
of terms, and call this the doctrine of _gradual emancipation_, while
Abolitionists would call it the doctrine of _immediate emancipation_.

As this is the state of public opinion at the North, there is no
necessity for using any influence with northern ladies, in order that
they may adopt your _principles_ on the subject of slavery; for they
hold them in common with yourself, and it would seem unwise, and might
prove irritating, to approach them as if they held opposite sentiments.

In regard to the duty of making efforts to bring the people of the
Southern States to adopt these principles, and act on them, it is
entirely another matter. On this point you would find a large majority
opposed to your views. Most persons in the non-slave-holding States have
considered the matter of Southern slavery, as one in which they were no
more called to interfere, than in the abolition of the press-gang system
in England, or the tythe system of Ireland. Public opinion may have been
wrong on this point, and yet have been right on all those great
principles of rectitude and justice relating to slavery, which
Abolitionists claim as their _distinctive_ peculiarities.

The distinctive peculiarity of the Abolition Society is this: it is a
voluntary association in one section of the country, designed to awaken
public sentiment against a moral evil existing in another section of the
country, and the principal point of effort seems to be, to enlarge the
numbers of this association as a means of influencing public sentiment.
The principal object of your proposed tour, I suppose, is to present
facts, arguments, and persuasions to influence northern ladies to enrol
themselves as members of this association.

I will therefore proceed to present some of the reasons which may be
brought against such a measure as the one you would urge.

In the first place, the main principle of action in that society rests
wholly on a false deduction from past experience. Experience has shown,
that when certain moral evils exist in a community, efforts to awaken
public sentiment against such practices, and combinations for the
exercise of personal influence and example, have in various cases tended
to rectify these evils. Thus in respect to intemperance;--the collecting
of facts, the labours of public lecturers and the distribution of
publications, have had much effect in diminishing the evil. So in
reference to the slave-trade and slavery in England. The English nation
possessed the power of regulating their own trade, and of giving liberty
to every slave in their dominions; and yet they were entirely unmindful
of their duty on this subject. Clarkson, Wilberforce, and their
coadjutors, commenced a system of operations to arouse and influence
public sentiment, and they succeeded in securing the suppression of the
slave trade, and the gradual abolition of slavery in the English
colonies. In both these cases, the effort was to enlighten and direct
public sentiment in a community, of which the actors were a portion, in
order to lead them to rectify an evil existing among THEMSELVES, which
was entirely under their control.

From the success of such efforts, the Abolitionists of this country have
drawn inferences, which appear to be not only illogical, but false.
Because individuals in _their own_ community have aroused their fellow
citizens to correct their own evils, therefore they infer that attempts
to convince their fellow-citizens of the faults of _another_ community
will lead that community to forsake their evil practices. An example
will more clearly illustrate the case. Suppose two rival cities, which
have always been in competition, and always jealous of each other's
reputation and prosperity. Certain individuals in one of these cities
become convinced, that the sin of intemperance is destroying their
prosperity and domestic happiness. They proceed to collect facts, they
arrange statistics, they call public meetings, they form voluntary
associations, they use arguments, entreaties and personal example, and
by these means they arrest the evil.

Suppose another set of men, in this same community, become convinced
that certain practices in trade and business in the rival city, are
dishonest, and have an oppressive bearing on certain classes in that
city, and are injurious to the interests of general commerce. Suppose
also, that these are practices, which, by those who allow them, are
considered as honourable and right. Those who are convinced of their
immorality, wish to alter the opinions and the practices of the citizens
of their rival city, and to do this, they commence the collection of
facts, that exhibit the tendencies of these practices and the evils they
have engendered. But instead of going among the community in which the
evils exist, and endeavouring to convince and persuade them, they
proceed to form voluntary associations among their neighbours at home,
and spend their time, money and efforts to convince their fellow
citizens that the inhabitants of their rival city are guilty of a great
sin. They also publish papers and tracts and send out agents, not to the
guilty city, but to all the neighbouring towns and villages, to convince
them of the sins of the city in their vicinity. And they claim that they
shall succeed in making that city break off its sins, by these measures,
because other men succeeded in banishing intemperance by labouring among
their own friends and fellow citizens. Is not this example exactly
parallel with the exertions of the Abolitionists? Are not the northern
and southern sections of our country distinct communities, with
different feelings and interests? Are they not rival, and jealous in
feeling? Have the northern States the power to rectify evils at the
South, as they have to remove their own moral deformities; or have they
any such power over the southern States as the British people had over
their own trade and their dependent colonies in the West Indies? Have
not Abolitionists been sending out papers, tracts, and agents to
convince the people of the North of the sins of the South? Have they not
refrained from going to the South with their facts, arguments, and
appeals, because they feared personal evils to themselves? And do not
Abolitionists found their hopes of success in their project, on the
success which crowned the efforts of British philanthropists in the case
of slavery, and on the success that has attended efforts to banish
intemperance? And do not these two cases differ entirely from the
Abolition movement in this main point, that one is an effort to convince
men of _their own_ sins, and the other is an effort to convince men of
the sins of _other persons_?

The second reason I would urge against joining the Abolition Society is,
that its character and measures are not either peaceful or Christian in
tendency, but they rather are those which tend to generate party spirit,
denunciation, recrimination, and angry passions.

But before bringing evidence to sustain this position, I wish to make a
distinction between the _men_ who constitute an association, and the
_measures_ which are advocated and adopted.

I believe, that as a body, Abolitionists are men of pure morals, of
great honesty of purpose, of real benevolence and piety, and of great
activity in efforts to promote what they consider the best interests of
their fellow men. I believe, that, in making efforts to abolish slavery,
they have taken measures, which they supposed were best calculated to
bring this evil to an end, with the greatest speed, and with the least
danger and suffering to the South. I do not believe they ever designed
to promote disunion, or insurrection, or to stir up strife, or that they
suppose that their measures can be justly characterized by the
peculiarities I have specified. I believe they have been urged forward
by a strong feeling of patriotism, as well as of religious duty, and
that they have made great sacrifices of feeling, character, time, and
money to promote what they believed to be the cause of humanity and the
service of God. I regard individuals among them, as having taken a bold
and courageous stand, in maintaining the liberty of free discussion, the
liberty of speech and of the press; though this however is somewhat
abated by the needless provocations by which they caused those
difficulties and hazards they so courageously sustained. In speaking
thus of Abolitionists as a body, it is not assumed that there are not
bad men found in this party as well as in every other; nor that among
those who are good men, there are not those who may have allowed party
spirit to take the place of Christian principle; men who have exhibited
a mournful destitution of Christian charity; who have indulged in an
overbearing, denouncing, and self-willed pertinacity as to measures. Yet
with these reservations, I believe that the above is no more than a fair
and just exhibition of that class of men who are embraced in the party
of Abolitionists. And all this can be admitted, and yet the objection I
am to urge against joining their ranks may stand in its full force.

To make the position clearer, an illustration may be allowed. Suppose a
body of good men become convinced that the inspired direction, "them
that sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear," imposes upon them
the duty of openly rebuking every body whom they discover in the
practice of any sin. Suppose these men are daily in the habit of going
into the streets, and calling all by-standers around them, pointing out
certain men, some as liars, some as dishonest, some as licentious, and
then bringing proofs of their guilt and rebuking them before all; at the
same time exhorting all around to point at them the finger of scorn.

They persevere in this course till the whole community is thrown into an
uproar; and assaults, and even bloodshed ensue. They then call on all
good citizens to protect their persons from abuse, and to maintain the
liberty of speech and of free opinion.

Now the men may be as pure in morals, as conscientious and upright in
intention, as any Abolitionist, and yet every one would say, that their
measures were unwise and unchristian.

In like manner, although Abolitionists may be lauded for many virtues,
still much evidence can be presented, that the character and measures of
the Abolition Society are not either peaceful or christian in tendency,
but that they are in their nature calculated to generate party spirit,
denunciation, recrimination, and angry passions.

The first thing I would present to establish this, is the character of
the leaders of this association. Every combined effort is necessarily
directed by leaders; and the spirit of the leaders will inevitably be
communicated to their coadjutors, and appear in the measures of the
whole body.

In attempting to characterize these leaders, I would first present
another leader of a similar enterprise, the beloved and venerated
WILBERFORCE. It is thus that his prominent traits are delineated by an
intimate friend.

"His extreme benevolence contributed largely to his success. I have
heard him say, that it was one of his constant rules, and on the
question of slavery especially, never to provoke an adversary--to allow
him credit fully for sincerity and purity of motive--to abstain from all
irritating expressions--to avoid even such political attacks as would
indispose his opponents for his great cause. In fact, the benignity, the
gentleness, the kind-heartedness of the man, disarmed the bitterest
foes. Not only on this question did he restrain himself, but generally.
Once he had been called during a whole debate 'the religious member,' in
a kind of scorn. He remarked afterwards, that he was much inclined to
have retorted, by calling his opponent the _irreligious_ member, but
that he refrained, as it would have been a returning of evil for evil.
Next to his general consistency, and love of the Scriptures, the
_humility_ of his character always appeared remarkable. The modest,
shrinking, simple Christian statesman and friend always appeared in him.
And the nearer you approached him, the more his habit of mind obviously
appeared to be modest and lowly. His _charity in judging of others_, is
a farther trait of his Christian character. Of his benevolence I need
not speak, but his _kind construction of doubtful actions_, his
_charitable language_ toward those with whom he most widely differed,
his thorough forgetfulness of little affronts, were fruits of that
general benevolence which continually appeared."

This was the leader, both in and out of Parliament, of that body of men
who combined to bring to an end slavery and the slave trade, in the
dominions of Great Britain. With him, as principal leaders, were
associated CLARKSON, SHARPE, MACAULAY, and others of a similar spirit.
These men were all of them characterized by that mild, benevolent,
peaceful, gentlemanly and forbearing spirit, which has been described as
so conspicuous in Wilberforce. And when their measures are examined, it
will be found that they were eminently mild, peaceful, and forbearing.
Though no effort that is to encounter the selfish interests of men, can
escape without odium and opposition, from those who are thwarted, and
from all whom they can influence, these men carefully took those
measures that were calculated to bring about their end with the least
opposition and evil possible. They avoided prejudices, strove to
conciliate opposers, shunned every thing that would give needless
offence and exasperation, began slowly and cautiously, with points which
could be the most easily carried, and advanced toward others only as
public sentiment became more and more enlightened. They did not beard
the lion in full face, by coming out as the first thing with the maxim,
that all slavery ought and must be abandoned immediately. They began
with "inquiries as to the _impolicy_ of the _slave trade_," and it was
years before they came to the point of the abolition of slavery. And
they carried their measures through, without producing warring parties
among _good men_, who held common principles with themselves. As a
general fact, the pious men of Great Britain acted harmoniously in this
great effort.

Let us now look at the leaders of the Abolition movement in America. The
man who first took the lead was William L. Garrison, who, though he
professes a belief in the Christian religion, is an avowed opponent of
most of its institutions. The character and spirit of this man have for
years been exhibited in "the Liberator," of which he is the editor. That
there is to be found in that paper, or in any thing else, any evidence
of his possessing the peculiar traits of Wilberforce, not even his
warmest admirers will maintain. How many of the opposite traits can be
found, those can best judge who have read his paper. Gradually others
joined themselves in the effort commenced by Garrison; but for a long
time they consisted chiefly of men who would fall into one of these
three classes; either good men who were so excited by a knowledge of the
enormous evils of slavery, that _any thing_ was considered better than
entire inactivity, or else men accustomed to a contracted field of
observation, and more qualified to judge of immediate results than of
general tendencies, or else men of ardent and impulsive temperament,
whose feelings are likely to take the lead, rather than their judgment.

There are no men who act more efficiently as the leaders of an
enterprise than the editors of the periodicals that advocate and defend
it. The editors of the Emancipator, the Friend of Man, the New York
Evangelist, and the other abolition periodicals, may therefore be
considered as among the chief leaders of the enterprise, and their
papers are the mirror from which their spirit and character are
reflected.

I wish the friends of these editors would cull from their papers all the
indications they can find of the peculiarities that distinguished
Wilberforce and his associates; all the evidence of "a modest and lowly
spirit,"--all the exhibitions of "charity in judging of the motives of
those who oppose their measures,"--all the "indications of benignity,
gentleness, and kind-heartedness,"--all the "kind constructions of
doubtful actions,"--all the "charitable language used toward those who
differ in opinion or measures,"--all the "thorough forgetfulness of
little affronts,"--all the cases where "opponents are allowed full
credit for purity and sincerity of motive,"--all cases where they have
been careful "never to provoke an adversary,"--all cases where they have
"refrained from all irritating expressions,"--all cases where they have
avoided every thing that would "indispose their opponents for their
great cause," and then compare the result with what may be found of an
opposite character, and I think it would not be unsafe to infer that an
association whose measures, on an exciting subject, were guided by such
men, would be more likely to be aggressive than peaceful. The position I
would establish will appear more clearly, by examining in detail some of
the prominent measures which have been adopted by this association.

One of the first measures of Abolitionists was an attack on a benevolent
society, originated and sustained by some of the most pious and devoted
men of the age. It was imagined by Abolitionists, that the influence and
measures of the Colonization Society tended to retard the abolition of
slavery, and to perpetuate injurious prejudices against the coloured
race. The peaceful and christian method of meeting this difficulty would
have been, to collect all the evidence of this supposed hurtful tendency,
and privately, and in a respectful and conciliating way, to have
presented it to the attention of the wise and benevolent men, who were
most interested in sustaining this institution. If this measure did not
avail to convince them, then it would have been safe and justifiable to
present to the public a temperate statement of facts, and of the
deductions based on them, drawn up in a respectful and candid manner,
with every charitable allowance which truth could warrant. Instead of
this, when the attempt was first made to turn public opinion against the
Colonization Society, I met one of the most influential supporters of
that institution, just after he had had an interview with a leading
Abolitionist. This gentleman was most remarkable for his urbanity,
meekness, and benevolence, and his remark to me in reference to this
interview, shows what was its nature. "I love truth and sound argument,"
said he, "but when a man comes at me with a sledge hammer, I cannot help
dodging." This is a specimen of their private manner of dealing. In
public, the enterprise was attacked as a plan for promoting the selfish
interests and prejudices of the whites, at the expense of the coloured
population; and in many cases, it was assumed that the conductors of
this association were aware of this, and accessory to it. And the style
in which the thing was done was at once offensive, inflammatory, and
exasperating. Denunciation, sneers, and public rebuke, were bestowed
indiscriminately upon the conductors of the enterprise, and of course
they fell upon many sincere, upright, and conscientious men, whose
feelings were harrowed by a sense of the injustice, the indecorum, and
the unchristian treatment, they received. And when a temporary
impression was made on the public mind, and its opponents supposed they
had succeeded in crushing this society, the most public and triumphant
exultation was not repressed. Compare this method of carrying a point,
with that adopted by Wilberforce and his compeers, and I think you will
allow that there was a way that was peaceful and christian, and that
this was not the way which was chosen.

The next measure of Abolitionism was an attempt to remove the prejudices
of the whites against the blacks, on account of natural peculiarities.
Now, prejudice is an _unreasonable_ and _groundless_ dislike of persons
or things. Of course, as it is unreasonable, it is the most difficult of
all things to conquer, and the worst and most irritating method that
could be attempted would be, to attack a man as guilty of sin, as
unreasonable, as ungenerous, or as proud, for allowing a certain
prejudice.

This is the sure way to produce anger, self-justification, and an
increase of the strength of prejudice, against that which has caused him
this rebuke and irritation.

The best way to make a person like a thing which is disagreeable, is to
try in some way to make it agreeable; and if a certain class of persons
is the subject of unreasonable prejudice, the peaceful and christian way
of removing it would be to endeavour to render the unfortunate persons
who compose this class, so useful, so humble and unassuming, so kind in
their feelings, and so full of love and good works, that prejudice would
be supplanted by complacency in their goodness, and pity and sympathy
for their disabilities. If the friends of the blacks had quietly set
themselves to work to increase their intelligence, their usefulness,
their respectability, their meekness, gentleness, and benevolence, and
then had appealed to the pity, generosity, and christian feelings of
their fellow citizens, a very different result would have appeared.
Instead of this, reproaches, rebukes, and sneers, were employed to
convince the whites that their prejudices were sinful, and without any
just cause. They were accused of pride, of selfish indifference, of
unchristian neglect. This tended to irritate the whites, and to increase
their prejudice against the blacks, who thus were made the causes of
rebuke and exasperation. Then, on the other hand, the blacks extensively
received the Liberator, and learned to imbibe the spirit of its
conductor.

They were taught to feel that they were injured and abused, the objects
of a guilty and unreasonable prejudice--that they occupied a lower place
in society than was right--that they ought to be treated as if they were
whites; and in repeated instances, attempts were made by their friends
to mingle them with whites, so as to break down the existing
distinctions of society. Now, the question is not, whether these things,
that were urged by Abolitionists, were true. The thing maintained is,
that the method taken by them to remove this prejudice was neither
peaceful nor christian in its tendency, but, on the contrary, was
calculated to increase the evil, and to generate anger, pride, and
recrimination, on one side, and envy, discontent, and revengeful
feelings, on the other.

These are some of the general measures which have been exhibited in the
Abolition movement. The same peculiarities may be as distinctly seen in
specific cases, where the peaceful and quiet way of accomplishing the
good was neglected, and the one most calculated to excite wrath and
strife was chosen. Take, for example, the effort to establish a college
for coloured persons. The quiet, peaceful, and christian way of doing
such a thing, would have been, for those who were interested in the
plan, to furnish the money necessary, and then to have selected a
retired place, where there would be the least prejudice and opposition
to be met, and there, in an unostentatious way, commenced the education
of the youth to be thus sustained. Instead of this, at a time when the
public mind was excited on the subject, it was noised abroad that a
college for blacks was to be founded. Then a city was selected for its
location, where was another college, so large as to demand constant
effort and vigilance to preserve quiet subordination; where contests
with "sailors and town boys" were barely kept at bay; a college
embracing a large proportion of southern students, who were highly
excited on the subject of slavery and emancipation; a college where half
the shoe-blacks and waiters were coloured men. Beside the very walls of
this college, it was proposed to found a college for coloured young men.
Could it be otherwise than that opposition, and that for the best of
reasons, would arise against such an attempt, both from the faculty of
the college and the citizens of the place? Could it be reasonably
expected that they would not oppose a measure so calculated to increase
their own difficulties and liabilities, and at the same time so certain
to place the proposed institution in the most unfavourable of all
circumstances? But when the measure was opposed, instead of yielding
meekly and peaceably to such reasonable objections, and soothing the
feelings and apprehensions that had been excited, by putting the best
construction on the matter, and seeking another place, it was claimed as
an evidence of opposition to the interests of the blacks, and as a mark
of the force of sinful prejudice. The worst, rather than the best,
motives were ascribed to some of the most respectable, and venerated,
and pious men, who opposed the measure; and a great deal was said and
done that was calculated to throw the community into an angry ferment.

Take another example. If a prudent and benevolent female had selected
almost any village in New England, and commenced a school for coloured
females, in a quiet, appropriate, and unostentatious way, the world
would never have heard of the case, except to applaud her benevolence,
and the kindness of the villagers, who aided her in the effort. But
instead of this, there appeared public advertisements, (which I saw at
the time,) stating that a seminary for the education of young ladies of
colour was to be opened in Canterbury, in the state of Connecticut,
where would be taught music on the piano forte, drawing, &c., together
with a course of English education. Now, there are not a dozen coloured
families in New England, in such pecuniary circumstances, that if they
were whites it would not be thought ridiculous to attempt to give their
daughters such a course of education, and Canterbury was a place where
but few of the wealthiest families ever thought of furnishing such
accomplishments for their children. Several other particulars might be
added that were exceedingly irritating, but this may serve as a specimen
of the method in which the whole affair was conducted. It was an entire
disregard of the prejudices and the proprieties of society, and
calculated to stimulate pride, anger, ill-will, contention, and all the
bitter feelings that spring from such collisions. Then, instead of
adopting measures to soothe and conciliate, rebukes, sneers and
denunciations, were employed, and Canterbury and Connecticut were held
up to public scorn and rebuke for doing what most other communities
would probably have done, if similarly tempted and provoked.

Take another case. It was deemed expedient by Abolitionists to establish
an Abolition paper, first in Kentucky, a slave State. It was driven from
that State, either by violence or by threats. It retreated to Ohio, one
of the free States. In selecting a place for its location, it might have
been established in a small place, where the people were of similar
views, or were not exposed to dangerous popular excitements. But
Cincinnati was selected; and when the most intelligent, the most
reasonable, and the most patriotic of the citizens remonstrated,--when
they represented that there were peculiar and unusual liabilities to
popular excitement on this subject,--that the organization and power of
the police made it extremely dangerous to excite a mob, and almost
impossible to control it,--that all the good aimed at could be
accomplished by locating the press in another place, where there were
not such dangerous liabilities,--when they kindly and respectfully urged
these considerations, they were disregarded. I myself was present when a
sincere friend urged upon the one who controlled that paper, the
obligations of good men, not merely to avoid breaking wholesome laws
themselves, but the duty of regarding the liabilities of others to
temptation; and that where Christians could foresee that by placing
certain temptations in the way of their fellow-men, all the
probabilities were, that they would yield, and yet persisted in doing
it, the tempters became partakers in the guilt of those who yielded to
the temptation. But these remonstrances were ineffectual. The paper must
not only be printed and circulated, but it must be stationed where were
the greatest probabilities that measures of illegal violence would
ensue. And when the evil was perpetrated, and a mob destroyed the press,
then those who had urged on these measures of temptation, turned upon
those who had advised and remonstrated, as the guilty authors of the
violence, because, in a season of excitement, the measures adopted to
restrain and control the mob, were not such as were deemed suitable and
right.

Now, in all the above cases, I would by no means justify the wrong or
the injudicious measures that may have been pursued, under this course
of provocation. The greatness of temptation does by no means release men
from obligation; but Christians are bound to remember that it is a
certain consequence of throwing men into strong excitement, that they
will act unwisely and wrong, and that the tempter as well as the tempted
are held responsible, both by God and man. In all these cases, it cannot
but appear that the good aimed at might have been accomplished in a
quiet, peaceable, and christian way, and that this was not the way which
was chosen.

The whole system of Abolition measures seems to leave entirely out of
view, the obligation of Christians to save their fellow men from all
needless temptations. If the thing to be done is only lawful and right,
it does not appear to have been a matter of effort to do it in such a
way as would not provoke and irritate; but often, if the chief aim had
been to do the good in the most injurious and offensive way, no more
certain and appropriate methods could have been devised.

So much has this been the character of Abolition movements, that many
have supposed it to be a deliberate and systematized plan of the leaders
to do nothing but what was strictly a _right_ guaranteed by law, and
yet, in such a manner, as to provoke men to anger, so that unjust and
illegal acts might ensue, knowing, that as a consequence, the opposers
of Abolition would be thrown into the wrong, and sympathy be aroused for
Abolitionists as injured and persecuted men. It is a fact, that
Abolitionists have taken the course most calculated to awaken illegal
acts of violence, and that when they have ensued, they have seemed to
rejoice in them, as calculated to advance and strengthen their cause.
The violence of mobs, the denunciations and unreasonable requirements of
the South, the denial of the right of petition, the restrictions
attempted to be laid upon freedom of speech, and freedom of the press,
are generally spoken of with exultation by Abolitionists, as what are
among the chief means of promoting their cause. It is not so much by
exciting feelings of pity and humanity, and Christian love, towards the
oppressed, as it is by awakening indignation at the treatment of
Abolitionists themselves, that their cause has prospered. How many men
have declared or implied, that in joining the ranks of Abolition, they
were influenced, not by their arguments, or by the wisdom of their
course, but because the violence of opposers had identified that cause
with the question of freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and civil
liberty.

But when I say that many have supposed that it was the deliberate
intention of the Abolitionists to foment illegal acts and violence, I
would by no means justify a supposition, which is contrary to the
dictates of justice and charity. The leaders of the Abolition Society
disclaim all such wishes or intentions; they only act apparently on the
assumption that they are exercising just rights, which they are not
bound to give up, because other men will act unreasonably and wickedly.

Another measure of Abolitionists, calculated to awaken evil feelings,
has been the treatment of those who objected to their proceedings.

A large majority of the philanthropic and pious, who hold common views
with the Abolitionists, as to the sin and evils of slavery, and the duty
of using all appropriate means to bring it to an end, have opposed their
measures, because they have believed them not calculated to promote, but
rather to retard the end proposed to be accomplished by them. The
peaceful and Christian method of encountering such opposition, would
have been to allow the opponents full credit for purity and integrity of
motive, to have avoided all harsh and censorious language, and to have
employed facts, arguments and persuasions, in a kind and respectful way
with the hope of modifying their views and allaying their fears. Instead
of this, the wise and good who opposed Abolition measures, have been
treated as though they were the friends and defenders of slavery, or as
those who, from a guilty, timid, time-serving policy, refused to take
the course which duty demanded. They have been addressed either as if it
were necessary to convince them that slavery is wrong and ought to be
abandoned, or else, as if they needed to be exhorted to give up their
timidity and selfish interest, and to perform a manifest duty, which
they were knowingly neglecting.

Now there is nothing more irritating, when a man is conscientious and
acting according to his own views of right, than to be dealt with in
this manner. The more men are treated as if they were honest and
sincere--the more they are treated with respect, fairness, and
benevolence, the more likely they are to be moved by evidence and
arguments. On the contrary, harshness, uncharitableness, and rebuke, for
opinions and conduct that are in agreement with a man's own views of
duty and rectitude, tend to awaken evil feelings, and indispose the mind
properly to regard evidence. Abolitionists have not only taken this
course, but in many cases, have seemed to act on the principle, that the
abolition of Slavery, in the particular mode in which they were aiming
to accomplish it, was of such paramount importance, that every thing
must be overthrown that stood in the way.

No matter what respect a man had gained for talents, virtue, and piety,
if he stood in the way of Abolitionism, he must be attacked as to
character and motives. No matter how important an institution might be,
if its influence was against the measures of Abolitionism, it must be
attacked openly, or sapped privately, till its influence was destroyed.
By such measures, the most direct means have been taken to awaken anger
at injury, and resentment at injustice, and to provoke retaliation on
those who inflict the wrong. All the partialities of personal
friendship; all the feelings of respect accorded to good and useful men;
all the interests that cluster around public institutions, entrenched
in the hearts of the multitudes who sustain them, were outraged by such
a course.

Another measure of Abolitionists, which has greatly tended to promote
wrath and strife, is their indiscreet and incorrect use of terms.

To make this apparent, it must be premised, that words have no inherent
meaning, but always signify that which they are commonly _understood_ to
mean. The question never should be asked, what _ought_ a word to mean?
but simply, what is the meaning generally attached to this word by those
who use it? Vocabularies and standard writers are the proper umpires to
decide this question. Now if men take words and give them a new and
peculiar use, and are consequently misunderstood, they are guilty of a
species of deception, and are accountable for all the evils that may
ensue as a consequence.

For example; if physicians should come out and declare, that it was
their opinion that they ought to poison all their patients, and they had
determined to do it, and then all the community should be thrown into
terror and excitement, it would be no justification for them to say,
that all they intended by that language was, that they should administer
as medicines, articles which are usually called poisons.

Now Abolitionists are before the community, and declare that all slavery
is sin, which ought to be immediately forsaken; and that it is their
object and intention to promote the _immediate emancipation_ of all the
slaves in this nation.

Now what is it that makes a man cease to be a slave and become free? It
is not kind treatment from a master; it is not paying wages to the
slave; it is not the intention to bestow freedom at a future time; it is
not treating a slave as if he were free; it is not feeling toward a
slave as if he were free. No instance can be found of any dictionary, or
any standard writer, nor any case in common discourse, where any of
these significations are attached to the word as constituting its
peculiar and appropriate meaning. It always signifies _that legal_ act,
which, by the laws of the land, changes a slave to a freeman.

What then is the _proper_ meaning of the language used by Abolitionists,
when they say that all slavery is a sin which ought to be immediately
abandoned, and that it is their object to secure the immediate
emancipation of all slaves?

The true and only proper meaning of such language is, that it is the
duty of every slave-holder in this nation, to go immediately and make
out the legal instruments, that, by the laws of the land, change all his
slaves to freemen. If their maxim is true, no exception can be made for
those who live in States where the act of emancipation, by a master,
makes a slave the property of the State, to be sold for the benefit of
the State; and no exception can be made for those, who, by the will of
testators, and by the law of the land, have no power to perform the
legal act, which alone can emancipate their slaves.

To meet this difficulty, Abolitionists affirm, that, in such cases, men
are physically unable to emancipate their slaves, and of course are not
bound to do it; and to save their great maxim, maintain that, in such
cases, the slaves are not slaves, and the slave-holders are not
slave-holders, although all their legal relations remain unchanged.

The meaning which the Abolitionist attaches to his language is this,
that every man is bound to treat his slaves, as nearly as he can, like
freemen; and to use all his influence to bring the system of slavery to
an end as soon as possible. And they allow that when men do this they
are free from guilt, in the matter of slavery, and undeserving of
censure.

But men at the North, and men at the South, understand the language used
in its true and proper sense; and Abolitionists have been using these
terms in a new and peculiar sense, which is inevitably and universally
misunderstood, and this is an occasion of much of the strife and alarm
which has prevailed both at the South and at the North. There are none
but these defenders of slavery who maintain that it is a relation
justifiable by the laws of the Gospel, who differ from Abolitionists in
regard to the real thing which is meant. The great mistake of
Abolitionists is in using terms which inculcate the immediate
annihilation of the relation, when they only intend to urge the
Christian duty of treating slaves according to the gospel rules of
justice and benevolence, and using all lawful and appropriate means for
bringing a most pernicious system to a speedy end.

If Abolitionists will only cease to teach that _all_ slave-holding is a
sin which ought to be _immediately abolished_; if they will cease to
urge their plan as one of _immediate emancipation_, and teach simply and
exactly that which they do mean, much strife and misunderstanding will
cease. But so long as they persevere in using these terms in a new and
peculiar sense, which will always be misunderstood, they are guilty of a
species of deception and accountable for the evils that follow.

One other instance of a similar misuse of terms may be mentioned. The
word "man-stealer" has one peculiar signification, and it is no more
synonymous with "slave-holder" than it is with "sheep-stealer." But
Abolitionists show that a slave-holder, in fact, does very many of the
evils that are perpetrated by a man-stealer, and that the crime is quite
as evil in its nature, and very similar in character, and, therefore, he
calls a slave-holder a man-stealer.

On this principle there is no abusive language that may not be employed
to render any man odious--for every man commits sin of some kind, and
every sin is like some other sin, in many respects, and in certain
aggravated cases, may be bad, or even worse, than another sin with a
much more odious name. It is easy to show that a man who neglects all
religious duty is very much like an atheist, and if he has had great
advantages, and the atheist very few, he may be much more guilty than an
atheist. And so, half the respectable men in our religious communities,
may be called atheists, with as much propriety as a slave-holder can be
called a man-stealer. Abolitionists have proceeded on this principle, in
their various publications, until the terms of odium that have been
showered upon slave-holders, would form a large page in the vocabulary
of Billingsgate. This method of dealing with those whom we wish to
convince and persuade, is as contrary to the dictates of common sense,
as it is to the rules of good breeding and the laws of the gospel.

The preceding particulars are selected, as the evidence to be presented,
that the character and measures of the Abolition Society are neither
peaceful nor Christian in their tendency; but that in their nature they
are calculated to generate party-spirit, denunciation, recrimination,
and angry passions. If such be the tendency of this institution, it
follows, that it is wrong for a Christian, or any lover of peace, to be
connected with it.

The assertion that Christianity itself has led to strife and contention,
is not a safe method of evading this argument. Christianity is a system
of _persuasion_, tending, by kind and gentle influences, to make men
_willing_ to leave off their sins--and it comes, not to convince those
who are not sinners, but to sinners themselves.

Abolitionism, on the contrary, is a system of _coercion_ by public
opinion; and in its present operation, its influence is not to convince
the erring, but to convince those who are not guilty, of the sins of
those who are.

Another prominent peculiarity of the Abolitionists, (which is an
objection to joining this association,) is their advocacy of a
principle, which is wrong and very pernicious in its tendency. I refer
to their views in regard to what is called "the doctrine of expediency."
Their difficulty on this subject seems to have arisen from want of a
clear distinction between the duty of those who are guilty of sin, and
the duty of those who are aiming to turn men from their sins. The
principle is assumed, that because certain men ought to abandon every
sin immediately, therefore, certain other men are bound _immediately_ to
try and make them do it. Now the question of expediency does not relate
to what men are bound to do, who are in the practice of sin
themselves--for the immediate relinquishment of sin is the duty of all;
but it relates to the duty of those who are to make efforts to induce
others to break off their wickedness.

Here, the wisdom and rectitude of a given course, depend entirely on the
_probabilities of success_. If a father has a son of a very peculiar
temperament, and he knows by observation, that the use of the rod will
make him more irritable and more liable to a certain fault, and that
kind arguments, and tender measures will more probably accomplish the
desired object, it is a rule of expediency to try the most probable
course. If a companion sees a friend committing a sin, and has, from
past experience, learned that remonstrances excite anger and obstinacy,
while a look of silent sorrow and disapprobation tends far more to
prevent the evil, expediency and duty demand silence rather than
remonstrance.

There are cases also, where differences in age, and station, and
character, forbid all interference to modify the conduct and character
of others.

A nursery maid may see that a father misgoverns his children, and
ill-treats his wife. But her station makes it inexpedient for her to
turn reprover. It is a case where reproof would do no good, but only
evil.

So in communities, the propriety and rectitude of measures can be
decided, not by the rules of duty that should govern those who are to
renounce sin, but by the probabilities of good or evil consequence.

The Abolitionists seem to lose sight of this distinction. They form
voluntary associations in free States, to convince their fellow
citizens of the sins of other men in other communities. They are blamed
and opposed, because their measures are deemed inexpedient, and
calculated to increase, rather than diminish the evils to be cured.

In return, they show that slavery is a sin which ought to be abandoned
immediately, and seem to suppose that it follows as a correct inference,
that they themselves ought to engage in a system of agitation against
it, and that it is needless for them to inquire whether preaching the
truth in the manner they propose, will increase or diminish the evil.
They assume that whenever sin is committed, not only ought the sinner
immediately to cease, but all his fellow-sinners are bound to take
measures to make him cease, and to take measures, without any reference
to the probabilities of success.

That this is a correct representation of the views of Abolitionists
generally, is evident from their periodicals and conversation. All their
remarks about preaching the truth and leaving consequences to God--all
their depreciation of the doctrine of expediency, are rendered relevant
only by this supposition.

The impression made by their writings is, that God has made rules of
duty; that all men are in all cases to remonstrate against the violation
of those rules; and that God will take the responsibility of bringing
good out of this course; so that we ourselves are relieved from any
necessity of inquiring as to probable results.

If this be not the theory of duty adopted by this association, then they
stand on common ground with those who oppose their measures, viz: that
the propriety and duty of a given course is to be decided by
_probabilities as to its results_; and these probabilities are to be
determined by the _known laws of mind_, and the _records of past
experience_.

For only one of two positions can be held. Either that it is the duty of
all men to remonstrate at all times against all violations of duty, and
leave the consequences with God; or else that men are to use their
judgment, and take the part of remonstrance only at such a time and
place, and in such a manner, as promise the best results.

That the Abolitionists have not held the second of these positions, must
be obvious to all who have read their documents. It would therefore be
unwise and wrong to join an association which sustains a principle false
in itself, and one which, if acted out, would tend to wrath and strife
and every evil word and work.

Another reason, and the most important of all, against promoting the
plans of the Abolitionists, is involved in the main question--_what are
the probabilities as to the results of their movements?_ The only way to
judge of the future results of certain measures is, by the known laws of
mind, and the recorded experience of the past.

Now what is the evil to be cured?

SLAVERY IN THIS NATION.

That this evil is at no distant period to come to an end, is the
unanimous opinion of all who either notice the tendencies of the age, or
believe in the prophecies of the Bible. All who act on Christian
principles in regard to slavery, believe that in a given period
(variously estimated) it will end. The only question then, in regard to
the benefits to be gained, or the evils to be dreaded in the present
agitation of the subject, relates to the _time_ and the _manner_ of its
extinction. The Abolitionists claim that their method will bring it to
an end in the shortest time, and in the safest and best way. Their
opponents believe, that it will tend to bring it to an end, if at all,
at the most distant period, and in the most dangerous way.

As neither party are gifted with prescience, and as the Deity has made
no revelations as to the future results of any given measures, all the
means