u now. He'll be with you in
another minute. Tell him that as a friend you can't let him sell Clare.
Offer him enough to tide him over the Derby. I'm willing to risk
everything on that."

"Are you trying to tell me that if Clarehaven pulls off the Derby our
arrangement is canceled? Ring off. Nothing doing, dear lady."

Away in Albany she heard a bell shrill; it was like a prompter's warning
of the play's ending.

"That's Tony now," she cried. "Do what I ask. Give him enough. He'll say
how much is necessary for the moment. Lend it to him on the security of
Clare. Buy up his mortgages. Do what you like, and if Tony comes back
with Clare still his, at any rate until he has lost all or saved all on
the Derby, I'll come to Albany this afternoon and thank you."

"Tangibly?" murmured Houston.

"Tangibly."

Her agitated breath had so bedewed the mouthpiece that when with
trembling hands she replaced the holder it was like being released from
a kiss.


VI

Tony came back from his visit to Houston in a temper of serene optimism.

"Well, Doodles," he cried, gaily, "I've saved Clare for you."

"Oh, you've saved Clare, have you?" She could not resist a slight
accentuation of the pronoun, but he did not notice it.

"Yes, Houston was very decent. I told him how much I hated getting rid
of the old place, and he was very decent. Of course he knows from
Starkey that the Derby is a certainty and that in Full Moon and Vanity
Girl I've got the two best three-year-olds in England."

"You're still infatuated with the filly?"

"Now wait a minute. Don't begin arguing till you hear what's been
decided. Houston is going to lend me enough cash to pay off the present
mortgages of Clare, and when that is done I'm going to mortgage the
place to him on the understanding that if I don't settle up on the
Monday after the Derby he takes immediate possession. I told him that I
should want some ready money, and he offers to buy whichever horse I
don't run in the Derby."

"Then sell him Vanity Girl," said Dorothy, quickly. She could hardly
refrain from adding, "One of us he must have."

"Don't be in such a hurry. At present Full Moon has engagements in the
Two Thousand Guineas and the Derby, also in the Grand Prix and the
Leger. Vanity Girl is entered for the Thousand Guineas, the Derby, and
the Oaks. I shall run Full Moon for the Guineas; if he wins he will be
the Derby favorite. In that case I shall scratch Vanity Girl for the
Thousand Guineas, and we'll have a secret trial at Winsley. Houston
hasn't taken Moonbeam away yet, and Starkey is to put him into strong
work for this trial. If Full Moon shows up best in the trial I shall
sell Vanity Girl to Houston, who will run her in the Oaks; then I shall
back Full Moon for the Derby till the cows come home. But if, as Starkey
thinks and as I think, Vanity Girl is the goods, Houston is to have Full
Moon for ten thousand pounds as soon as I've scratched him for the
Derby. I don't want to scratch him until I've got my money out on the
filly, but I shall get busy quickly, and the public will have plenty of
time to know which horse I think is going to win. Then you and I,
Doodles dear, will retire from the turf and live ever afterward at
Clare."

"And if Full Moon doesn't win the Guineas?"

"Oh, I've thought of that. In that case I shall run Vanity Girl in the
Thousand Guineas, declare to win with either in the Derby, and Houston
is to have his pick after the race for ten thousand pounds."

"And you've thought out all this wonderful and complicated plan of
campaign?"

"Not entirely," Tony admitted.

"Not at all," said Dorothy, sharply. "You know perfectly well that
Houston thought out every detail of it."

She wondered if a man who could juggle like this with the future of
horses might not be equally expert with women. But no, he wanted the
woman; he did not want the horses. She sent a note round to Albany
saying that a bad headache kept her at home that afternoon, but that she
fully appreciated the good will he had just shown and that she hoped to
see him at dinner to-morrow. She knew that she could not keep Houston at
arm's-length indefinitely, but if she could keep him there until, at any
rate, Clare was temporarily safe she should have a breathing-space until
June. Then if Tony lost the Derby, she should have to offer herself to
preserve Clare; but if he won, she and Clare would both be saved.

"God!" she cried to her soul, "with me it always seems that June is to
decide everything."

When the following night Houston reproached her for breaking the
appointment of yesterday she reminded him that he, too, had only made
promises so far; but when Houston kept his word and freed Clare until
the settling day after Epsom, she still held back.

"You'll appreciate me all the more for being kept waiting."

"I've waited years," he said.

"I'll go for a drive with you to-morrow."

So it went on until the week before the Guineas.

"You're trying to fool me. You think you can get something for nothing
as easily now as you could when you were at the Vanity."

"Be reasonable, my dear man," she begged. "Your money is perfectly safe.
What are you risking? If Tony loses the Derby you win me the moment you
put in my hands the title-deeds of Clare. If Tony wins the Derby...."
She let her deep-brown eyes gaze into his.

"Kiss me," said Houston. "Kiss me once and I'll believe you."

A good lady's maid is bound to enjoy a considerable amount of intimacy
in her relationship with her mistress; no lover is allowed as much.
Dorothy from youth had trained her kisses to be her servants; they had
always served her well, and if a degree of intimacy was unavoidable it
was always the intimacy of a servant, which does not count. One of these
kisses she summoned to her aid now.

Tony proposed that Lonsdale should drive them down to Newmarket for the
Guineas, but Lonsdale said he was booked to fly on that day.

"You never come near us now," said Dorothy, reproachfully.

"I can't stand that fellow Houston. I can't think how you can bear him
around all the time."

"He's very amusing," said Dorothy.

"So's a bishop in a bathing-dress. If you want amusement you can get
plenty of it," Lonsdale growled, "without having to depend on a fellow
like that."

Tufton, who was as sensitive as a tress of seaweed to the atmosphere,
had also neglected his old friends recently, and Dorothy knew by his
manner that people must now be talking very hard about herself and
Houston.

Tony kept his promise not to bet heavily on the result of the Guineas,
and Full Moon's win did not do more than keep quiet a certain number of
low-class creditors who had for some time been supplying Lord and Lady
Clarehaven with such trifles as wine, food, and clothes. However, the
win did seem to make the Derby a certainty for the stable; Full Moon and
Vanity Girl, unlike Moonbeam, had both won at Epsom as two-year-olds,
and if Vanity Girl could beat Full Moon, surely no horse in England
could beat her on a course to which she had already shown her
partiality. When the filly did not appear in the Thousand Guineas the
quidnuncs, the how-nows, and the what-nots of the turf said she had
wintered disappointingly and that she would never be seen in the Oaks.
There was scarcely a sporting paper that did not assure its readers that
they would soon hear of Vanity Girl's having been scratched for both the
Derby and the Oaks. She was a flier, but a non-stayer, and the Stewards'
Cup at Goodwood was her journey.

At the same time the quidnuncs, the how-nows, and the what-nots of the
turf were puzzled to find that after Full Moon's victory in the Guineas
no money from Starkey Lodge seemed to be going on the colt's chances for
the Derby. All the touts set hard to work to solve what was called the
Starkey Lodge Puzzle; Winsley and the hamlets round were frequented by
inquisitive men whose pockets were bulging with sheaves of telegraph
forms.

"They think we've got something up our sleeves," said the trainer to the
owner. It was half past four o'clock of a morning early in May; Tony,
Dorothy, Houston, and Starkey had just taken up their positions to watch
the trial that was to decide which horse should carry the Clarehaven
colors a month hence. They had motored down to Winsley the night before;
and under a cold sky of turquoise scattered with pearls and amethysts
they had ridden up here at dawn; but when their clothing had been taken
off the horses, heads had popped up like rabbits from behind every
hillock along the course.

"No good running it this morning," said the trainer, shouting some abuse
at the touts and galloping his hack in the direction of the horses.

The sun was now well about the rounded edge of the downs; the air of the
morning was lustrous and scented with young grass upon which the dew lay
like golden wine.

"You can't get up too early for these touts," Starkey told them at
breakfast, "and if we want to know where we are for the Derby a bit
before any one else, we'll have to run the trial by moonlight. I'll keep
'em on the hop all the day before and tire some of these Nosey Parkers
into staying at home for once in their lives."

Dorothy was never sorry of an excuse to spend a few days with the
horses. They had caused her so much misery; but she had no ill will when
she saw them.

"Yes," said the trainer. "A moonlight trial. That's the ticket. What
with Full Moon and Moonbeam you can't say it isn't highly suitable. I'm
not going to pretend that Moonbeam is up to his best form. Thinking Mr.
Houston was going to take him to the stud, I only began putting him into
strong work a month ago. So I thought we'd run them at weights for sex,
and put in a couple of good handicappers belonging to Mr. Ginsberg to
make a bit of a field."

At two o'clock there was the clank of a pail in the stable-yard,
followed by a low murmur of voices and the grumble of the big yard gates
being cautiously opened. Presently the team emerged and walked slowly up
the village street, where half a dozen touts were fast asleep, because
they must be up at dawn to haunt the entrance to the Starkey Lodge
Stables. By the magic of the moon the horses in their clothing were
turned into the caparisoned steeds of knights-at-arms setting forth upon
a romantic quest. Dorothy, Houston, Tony, and the trainer followed on
hacks; and even when far out of hearing of the most vigilant tout they
continued to talk in half-tones. So breathless was the night that the
thundering of the hoofs coming nearer and nearer over the turf seemed to
vibrate the stars, and Dorothy had a fancy that presently all the people
in the little villages below the rim of the downs would wake and run
with lanterns up here to know if the moon had fallen down upon the great
world.

Vanity Girl won the trial; Moonbeam was second; the winner of the
Guineas was third.

"Well, I hope that's decisive enough," said Tony, gleefully. "Starkey,
you were right!"

He and the trainer moved off in excited conversation. Houston took
Dorothy's hand, and she did not try to withdraw it from his grasp;
Vanity Girl was going to win the Derby; Clare would be safe in June; she
should be safe in June. The benevolent moon, quite undisturbed by all
this mad nocturnal galloping, gazed blandly at Dorothy's complaisance;
she would not have put a cloud up to her face for much more than that,
the unscrupulous old bawd.

A week later the following paragraph appeared in one of the sporting
weeklies:

                       THE STARKEY LODGE PUZZLE

     Rumor says that the young Earl of Clarehaven, who has recently had
     very heavy losses on the turf, positively intends to capture the
     Derby this year. It was only a few months ago that we had to
     condole with the gallant young nobleman on the sad necessity which
     forced him to sell that great horse Moonbeam last year to the
     well-known South African capitalist, Mr. Lionel Houston, who
     indorsed the public view that Moonbeam's defeat in the Derby by his
     own horse Chimpanzee was not true form when he sold Chimpanzee to
     an Australian syndicate of breeders and bought Moonbeam for the
     stud he is now forming, and which we have no doubt will give many
     famous new names to the history of English racing. But our readers'
     present concern is what is popularly known as the Starkey Lodge
     Puzzle. We have the highest authority for saying that this is no
     longer a puzzle. At an important trial held in great secrecy on the
     Starkey Lodge training-grounds it was conclusively established that
     Vanity Girl is more than likely to give the Blue Riband of the turf
     to Lord Clarehaven and console him for the failure of Moonbeam. It
     will interest our readers from the smallest punter upward to hear
     that Full Moon, the victor of the Two Thousand Guineas and the
     present Derby favorite, will not run at Epsom, having been sold
     like his half-brother to Mr. Lionel Houston, who no doubt intends
     to keep him for the St. Leger, a race which he is ambitious of
     winning. We need scarcely point out to our readers the obvious tip
     for this year's Derby, and we do not hesitate to plump right out
     for Vanity Girl as the winner. We were the only paper to advise our
     readers not to back Full Moon until the intentions of the stable
     were a little plainer, and to all those who failed to follow our
     advice we can only say, "I told you so." Lord Clarehaven has done
     well to scratch the winner of the Guineas, for there is no doubt
     that if both the colt and his stable companion had faced the
     starter at Epsom the public would have followed the son of Cyllene.
     As it is, we confidently expect to see Vanity Girl a raging
     favorite before the week is out, and we may remind our readers that
     Lord Clarehaven's beautiful chestnut has already shown that she
     likes the Epsom course by winning the Woodcote Stakes last year.
     Her running at Newmarket last autumn may be discounted. We happened
     to know that the stable was coughing; as we have hinted, the
     gallant young nobleman who sports the black, white, and purple was
     very hard hit by her defeats, and this expression of renewed
     confidence in the chestnut daughter of Spearmint cannot be
     disregarded.

The people who had hurried to put their money on Full Moon grumbled
loudly; but the public appreciated the clear lead that Tony had given
them. He had put his own money on Vanity Girl before the result of the
trial leaked out, and though he had obtained tens against the first two
thousand he wagered, the news ran round the clubs so quickly that even
before the public was warned by the scratching of Full Moon that Vanity
Girl was the hope of Clare, he was finding it hard to get fours against
the filly; after that her price shortened to five to two; in the week
before the race it was only six to four; in the ring on the day itself
not a bookmaker was risking more than eleven to ten, and with money
still pouring in faster than ever she seemed likely to start at odds on,
an unprecedented price for a horse that had not been seen in public
since two consecutive defeats in the autumn of the year before. The
public could not be blamed for their eagerness to back the filly. It was
generally known that Clarehaven either had to win the Derby or be
ruined, and if he preferred Vanity Girl to the winner of the Guineas at
such a crisis in his affair she must indeed be sure of her success. If
the public had known that even his wife's honor was in pawn besides his
house and his lands they could not have been more confident.

"If Vanity Girl fails," Dorothy asked, on the morning of the race, "you
won't have a halfpenny left?"

"I might have an odd hundred pounds," Tony reckoned.

"And your mother--and Bella?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"I suppose Uncle Chat will look after them."

"And us?"

"Oh, we'll emigrate or something. Rather fun, don't you know. I shall
wangle something. The going will be hardish," he said, looking at the
sky, "and that's always in her favor. She hated that Newmarket mud last
autumn. Come on, Doodles, the car's waiting."

They walked down the steps of the flat, and the porter who had hurried
out to shut the door of the car touched his cap.

"Good luck, my lady! Good luck, my lord! Shepherd's Market is on Vanity
Girl to the last copper."

"Put on a sovereign for yourself, Galloway," said his lordship, grandly
proffering the coin.

Several loafers who had sometimes run for his lordship's cabs shouted,
"Hurrah for the Derby favorite!" and Tony flung them some silver to back
his filly. The road to Epsom was thronged; Tony, who was obviously
feeling nervous, had left the driving to the chauffeur, and was sitting
back with Dorothy in the body of the car.

"I think Lonnie might have come with us," he said, fretfully.

"Does it bore you so much driving with me alone?" she asked.

"Don't be silly! Of course not. But I'm nervy and.... Oh, but what rot!
Nothing can go wrong."

They were passing a four-in-hand with loud toots upon their Gabriel
horn, which were being answered by the guard of the coach, when he
suddenly recognized the occupants of the car. Standing up, he blew a
dear "Viewhalloo!" and shouted: "Berkshire's on the filly, my lord, to
the last baby! Hurrah for Vanity Girl!" There was a block in the
traffic; the occupants of every vehicle in earshot, from the gray hats
and laces of the four-in-hand to the pearlies and plumes of a coster's
cart, applauded the earl and countess, each after his own fashion.

"Don't forget the Mile End Road, Mr. Hearl of Clarehaven," bawled one of
the costers, "if that's who you are. Hoobeeluddiray!" he went on, and
caught his moke an ecstatic thwack on the crupper.

In the ring friends and acquaintances crowded round them, eager to say
how they had backed Vanity Girl and how fervently they hoped for her
victory. There was no doubt that if the filly was beaten a groan of
disappointment would resound through England.

"I think it's so sweet that Lord Clarehaven's horse should be called
Vanity Girl," some foolish woman was babbling. "So sweet and romantic,"
she twittered on.

"Yes, what devotion," chirped another as foolish.

Tony wanted to go round to the paddock to have a few last words with
Starkey and the jockey O'Hara, but Dorothy did not think she could bear
to see the filly before the race.

"I'm so nervous," she said, "that I feel I should communicate my nerves
to her. But don't you bother about me. I'll wait for you in the
inclosure."

"Where's Houston?" said Tony, irritably. "I thought he was going to meet
us."

At that moment a messenger-boy came up. "Are you the Earl of
Clarehaven?" he asked, perkily, and handed Tony a note, which the latter
read out:

     "DEAR CLAREHAVEN,--To what will I'm sure be my lifelong regret,
     important business prevents me from being at Epsom to see your
     triumph. Believe me, my dear fellow, that there is no one who hopes
     more cordially than I do for your success to-day. My kindest
     regards to your wife and tell her from me that I'm looking forward
     to our Derby dinner at the Carlton to-night.

     Yours ever sincerely,

     LIONEL HOUSTON."

"Funny chap! But I believe he's sincere," Tony muttered, "though it
would be all to his interest if I lost."

But how much to his interest, Dorothy thought, how little did Tony know.

She waited for him in the company of the twittering women until he
returned from the paddock.

"They're going down now," he told her.

"Everything all right?" she asked.

"Yes, yes." He was biting his nails and cursing the focusing
arrangements of his field-glasses.

"They're off!"

The roar of the crowd was like a mighty storm within which isolated
remarks were heard like the spars of a ship going one by one.

"She isn't finding it so easy."

"He's taking her into the rails too soon."

"My God! I wouldn't lay sixpence there won't be an objection for
crossing. Did you see that?"

"Go on, Vanity Girl! Go on!"

"Go on, you blasted favorite!"

"She's swishing her tail."

"No, she's not. That's ... yes, it's her. Vanity Girl! Vanity Girl!"

"Go on, Vanity Girl!"

The roaring died down to a suppressed murmur of agitation.

"What's the matter with the favorite?"

"O'Hara's flogging her along."

The horses flashed past the stand with the black, white and purple of
Clarehaven twinkling in the ruck like a setting star.

"Tony!" Dorothy screamed. "She's beaten!"

"Oh well," said the owner, "don't make such a noise about it."

He was smiling a foolish, fixed smile, but he let his glasses drop from
his hands on the toes of a lady close by.

"I'm very sorry, ma'am," said Tony, raising his hat. "I hope I didn't
hurt you."

The injured lady glared at him; it was her first Derby, and perhaps she
did not realize that it mattered who won or lost.

"Come on, Doodles," said Tony. "Home. For God's sake, let's get home."

He would not wait to hear any explanation of the filly's defeat, but
pushed his way savagely through the crowd to find the car.

"Gorblime!" a ragged vender of unauthorized race-cards was ejaculating
near the garage. "Gor strike me blurry well pink! She'd make a blurry
tortoise crick his blurry neck looking round to see why she was dawdling
behind. Race-horse? Why, I reckon a keb-horse could give her three stone
and win in a blurry canter, I do. Vanity Girl? Vanity Bitch, that's what
she ought to have been called."


VII

The news of the defeat had already reached Halfmoon Street, and Galloway
inclined his head when they passed quickly from the car into the hall of
the flats, as if his patrons were returning from a funeral.

"We must telephone round to the Carlton to say that the dinner is off,"
said Tony; even that small action he left to his wife, himself sitting
for the rest of the evening mute of speech, but drumming upon the table
with his fingers or sometimes tambourinating upon an ash-tray. His
dinner consisted of anchovy sandwiches washed down by brandy. There was
no word from Houston, and Dorothy supposed that he was waiting to hear
from her. "Going! Going! Clare! Clare! Clare!" The auctioneer's hammer
seemed to be striking her temples, and, passing her hand over her
forehead, she realized that it was only Tony who was drumming upon the
table or tambourinating upon the ash-tray. She went to bed before he did
and, lying awake in the rosy light of the reading-lamp, she wondered if,
perhaps, he would try to forget this day in her arms, half hoped he
would, and picked up the hand-mirror beside her bed to see how she was
looking. He must have sat up drinking till very late--she had fallen
asleep and did not hear him come to bed--and in the morning his eyes
were bloodshot, his razor tremulous.

The letter-box was choked with bills; but there were several letters of
condolence, and a reminder of the Day of Judgment from an enthusiastic
enemy of the turf who, with ill-concealed relish, advised his lordship
to observe the hand of God in the retribution which had been meted out
to him and to turn away from his wickedness. Finally there were letters
from O'Hara, the jockey, and Houston.

     EPSOM SUMMER MEETING 1914.

     _Wednesday evening._

     MY LORD,--I had hoped to have a few words with your lordship after
     the race, but was told you already left the course. I was intending
     to say that I could not go through what I suffered to-day on
     Friday, and would be obliged if your lordship wouldn't insist I
     would ride Vanity Girl in the Oaks. My lord, the filly is tired,
     and I wouldn't say another race mightn't kill her dead. It's not
     for me to give advice to your lordship, but how you ever come to
     run her in the Derby I don't know. She never was a stayer. I saw
     that plainly enough last autumn at Newmarket. I'm going back to
     France as soon as I hear from your lordship you won't run her in
     the Oaks. I'm engaged to ride Full Moon in the Grand Prix by Mr.
     Houston, and I hope I won't have to suffer what I suffered this
     afternoon. It's enough to make a jockey chuck riding for good and
     all.

     I am,

     Your lordship's obedient servant,

     PATRICK O'HARA.

     Pardon me if I've written a bit unfeelingly. It wasn't the filly's
     fault. She was tired. She didn't seem to know where she was,
     somehow, and when I flogged her along it near broke my heart to do
     it. She couldn't seem to understand what she was wanted to do. Poor
     little lady, I was so savage I could have shot her. But afterward I
     went and had a look at her, and had a few words with Mr. Starkey
     when he was abusing her.

     QZI ALBANY, W.

     _Wednesday._

     DEAR CLAREHAVEN,--I'm not going to worry you with sympathy at such
     a moment. But I'm writing as soon as possible to let you know that
     last week, owing to circumstances which would not interest anybody
     except a business man, I was compelled to part with my Clare
     mortgages for ready money, and I'm afraid that without doubt
     Reinhardt and Co. will foreclose on Monday. I wish I could offer to
     lend you the money to put yourself straight again, but I have been
     speculating myself and for the moment am a little short. By the
     way, I think Full Moon is a good thing for the Grand Prix. Perhaps
     you might get a bit on. Kindest regards to Lady Clarehaven.

     Sincerely,

     LIONEL HOUSTON.

Tony telegraphed to scratch Vanity Girl for the Oaks and ordered that
she should be sold outright for what she would fetch; L200 was the
figure, a tenth of what she had cost as a yearling and an insignificant
fraction of what she had cost in ruinous disappointment, to which,
perhaps, dishonor was soon to be added.

Houston's letter showed plainly that nothing was to be hoped for in that
quarter.

"Reinhardt and Co.," scoffed Tony. "In my opinion Reinhardt and Co.
includes Houston."

Dorothy wondered if the communication was intended to bring her quickly
to heel, to show her brutally that unless she kept her bargain Clare was
lost. She supposed that somehow Houston would be ingenious enough to
keep Tony from being suspicious when he found his house and lands
restored to him, and she even wondered if under the demoralizing effect
of gambling he would much mind if he did know. She looked at him with a
feeling half compassionate, half contemptuous while he was calculating,
with an optimism rapidly rising, every knickknack in the flat at four
times its value in the sale-room. She persuaded him to go out and forget
his troubles at the theater, and telephoned to the Albany that she was
coming to see Mr. Houston after dinner.

Dorothy dressed herself in a frock of champagne silk and wore no jewelry
except a drop pendant of black pearls, thinking ironically, when she
fastened it round her neck, how premature Tony had been in estimating
that it would fetch L500 at auction. She flung over her shoulders a
diaphanous black opera-cloak stenciled in gold and, covering her face
with a heavy veil of black Maltese lace, she passed out of Halfmoon
Street and walked slowly up Piccadilly in the June starlight. On second
thought she decided to enter Albany from Burlington Street instead of
through the courtyard, and, turning into Bond Street, moved like a ghost
along the pavements where on thronged mornings in old Vanity days her
radiance and roses used to compete for the public regard with the
luxurious shops on either side. Burlington Street at this hour was
deserted, and the porter of Albany with his appearance of an antique
coachman, and his manner between a butler's and a beadle's, dared not
hesitate to admit such an empress, and perhaps marveled, when he watched
her walk imperiously along the glass-roofed cloister that smelled of
freshly watered geraniums toward QZI, with what honey the ugly tenant of
it was able to attract this proud-pied moth.

Lady Clarehaven might have been excused for feeling a heroine, a Monna
Vanna in the tent of the conqueror, when she found herself in the big
square room which she now visited for the first time. She did not
indulge herself with heroics, however; it seemed to her so natural for
her to save Clare that the adventure was as commonplace as when once in
early days on the stage she had pawned a piece of jewelry she did not
like in order to save a set of furs to which she attached a great
importance. She threw back the opera-cloak and sat down in an arm-chair
to wait for Houston with as little perturbation as if she were waiting
for a dinner guest in her own drawing-room.

Suddenly he appeared from an inner doorway and, turning on several more
lights, looked at her. He was in evening dress, and the sudden glare
gave the impression that he was going to perform; he looked more like an
intelligent ape than ever when he was in evening dress.

"Well, here I am," she said.

Her coolness seemed to confuse him, and he began to ask her how she
liked his rooms, to say that he had been lucky enough to take them on as
they stood from a man called Prescott who had killed himself here. One
had the impression that he had bought the furniture for a song on
account of the unpleasant associations with a suicide.

"I'm rather tired of values," said Dorothy. "Clarehaven has been valuing
the flat at Halfmoon Street."

"Will you have something to drink?"

"Do you think that I require stimulating? Thanks, I don't."

It was curious that this man, who in Rhodes had appeared so sinister and
powerful and almost irresistible, should here in this decorous room with
only a background of good-breeding appear fussy and ineffective.

"But let me recommend you to have a drink," Dorothy laughed. "For, now
that you've got me, you're as awkward as a baboon with a porcelain
teacup."

Her instinct told her that she must dispel this atmosphere of
embarrassment unless she wanted to be bowed out of the chambers as from
those of a money-lender who had been compelled most respectfully and
without offense to refuse a loan to her ladyship. The allusion to the
baboon was sufficient. The decorum of Albany was shattered and Houston
held her in his arms.

At that moment the servant tapped at the door and announced that Lord
Clarehaven was in the anteroom; before Houston could hustle his quaking
servant outside and lock the door Tony appeared in the entrance, a
riding-crop in his hands.

"My God! you rascal," he was saying, "I've just found out all about you.
I've been fooled by you and that scoundrel of a trainer you recommended.
I've been ... That trial.... I've seen.... I've understood ... you
blackguard!" Without noticing Dorothy he had forced Houston across a
chair and was thumping him with the crop. "Yes, I've heard all about
you.... Of course people tell me afterward ... damned cowards.... You
damned sneaking hound ... I.D.B.... hound.., you dog ... and there's
nothing to be done because you were too clever ... curse you ... but
I'll have you booted off every racecourse in England...."

By this time he had beaten Houston insensible, and, looking up,
perceived his wife.

"Tony," she cried, "you really are rather an old darling."

"What are you doing here?" he panted.

"I was pleading for Clare."

"You oughtn't to have done that," he said, roughly. "You might get
yourself talked about, don't you know. Come along. It's rather lucky I
blew in. I met old Cobbett, who talked to me like a father. Too late, of
course, and nothing can be done. Besides.... However, come along. As
you're dressed we might see the last act."

"We've seen that already," said Dorothy. So brilliant and gay was she
that Tony forgot about everything. So did she, and they walked home arm
in arm along the deserted streets of Mayfair like lovers.

The scene in Albany was not made public property; Houston came to
himself in time to prevent that. Dorothy accepted Tony's interruption as
a sign that fortune did not intend her to preserve Clare, and she now
watched almost with equanimity the fabric of a great family crumble
daily to irreparable ruin. Then Full Moon, the winner of the Guineas,
scratched ignominiously for the Derby, won the Grand Prix in a canter,
and the following letter from the Earl of Stilton, K.G., appeared in the
_Times_:

     SIR,--In the interests of our national sport, which all Englishmen
     rightly regard as our most cherished possession, I call upon Lord
     Clarehaven to give a public explanation of his recent behavior. The
     facts are probably only too painfully known to many of your
     readers. In May Lord Clarehaven's horse, Full Moon, won the Two
     Thousand Guineas; two years ago his horse Moonbeam won the same
     race. Moonbeam ran fourth in the Derby and was transferred to the
     same stable as the winner, Chimpanzee. This horse, owned by Mr.
     Lionel Houston, was scratched for the St. Leger, and the race was
     won by Moonbeam. This was explicable; but when two years later
     another of Lord Clarehaven's horses wins the Two Thousand Guineas
     and finds his stable companion preferred to him to carry Lord
     Clarehaven's colors in the Derby, when, furthermore, the chosen
     filly runs like a plater, and when this morning we read that Full
     Moon, now in the ownership of Mr. Lionel Houston, has won the Grand
     Prix in a canter at a price which the totalizator puts at
     sixty-three to one, a proof that nobody in Paris considered the
     chances of this animal, the public may, perhaps, demand what it all
     means. They will ask still more when I inform them that I have
     absolute authority for saying that this horse was heavily backed in
     England, which proves that by some his chance was considered
     excellent. I have no wish to accuse his lordship of having
     deliberately deceived the public for his own advantage; but I do
     accuse him of folly that can only be characterized as criminal.
     Perhaps he has been the victim of his friend and of his trainer; at
     any rate, if his lordship was deceived about the chance of Vanity
     Girl, and if it is true that the defeat of Vanity Girl in the Derby
     represented to his lordship a loss of thousands of pounds in bets,
     he should make this clear. In that case I have no hesitation in
     accusing Mr. Lionel Houston, formerly known as Leopold Hausberg, of
     having deliberately conspired with the Starkey Lodge trainer to
     perpetrate a fraud not only upon their friend and patron, but also
     upon the public.

     I have the honor to be, sir,

     Your obedient servant,

     STILTON.

Although Lord Stilton's letter hit the nail on the head, Tony was so
furious at being called a fool in public that he sent the following
letter to the paper:

     SIR,--If Lord Stilton had not been my father's friend and a much
     older man than myself, I would pull his nose for the impudent
     letter he has written about me. The running of my filly in the
     Derby is an instance of the uncertainty of fortune, by which I am
     the greatest loser. I was convinced by a trial which I saw with my
     own eyes between Full Moon and Vanity Girl that the former did not
     stand a chance against the filly. It was I who insisted upon
     scratching him for the Derby so that the public might be spared the
     unpleasant doubt that always exists when an owner runs two horses
     in the same race. I sold the colt shortly after this trial to Mr.
     Houston, because I wished to put every halfpenny I could raise upon
     Vanity Girl. When I say that Mr. Houston is so little a friend of
     mine that I was unfortunately compelled to horsewhip him in his
     rooms on the day after the Derby, it will be understood even by
     Lord Stilton that there can be no possible suggestion of any
     collusion between myself and Mr. Houston. I do not know if Lord
     Stilton seriously means to insinuate that I have benefited by Full
     Moon's victory in the Grand Prix. If he does, the insinuation is
     cowardly and unjust. If Lord Stilton is so much concerned for the
     future of English sport, let him think twice before he hits a man
     who is down. Full Moon did not carry a halfpenny of my money.

     I am, sir, etc.,

     CLAREHAVEN.

This letter, with the reference to Lord Stilton's nose excised by a
judicious editor, rehabilitated Tony in the eyes of the public and
earned him a gracious apology from Lord Stilton, who also had to
apologize much less graciously to Houston and Starkey, being threatened
with legal proceedings unless he did so. Had there been the least chance
of substantiating the ugly rumors, both earls might have gone to law;
unfortunately legal advice said that neither of them stood a chance with
the astute pair, and public opinion contented itself with compassion for
the gallant young nobleman who had been thus victimized.

It may have been the victory of Full Moon in the Grand Prix with its
suggestion of what might have been, or it may have been only the
invincible optimism of the gambler, that started Tony off again upon his
vice. When by the middle of July he and Dorothy found themselves with
the rent of the flat paid up to Michaelmas, with enough furniture and
enough clothes for present needs and with L250 in ready money, he told
Dorothy that their only chance was for him to make money at cards. It
was in vain that she argued with him; he seemed to have learned nothing
from this disastrous summer, and with L100 in his pocket he went out one
night, to return at six o'clock the next morning with L1,000.

"My luck's in again," he declared, "and I've got a thundering good
system. You shall come with me every night, and I will give you two
hundred pounds, which I must not exceed. Nothing that I say must induce
you to give me another halfpenny. If I lose the two hundred pounds I
must go away. It'll be all right, 