qiatdra
shti?in,
    Messapus, excellent of horse. Hard strife the field to win!
    On this side and on that they play about Ausonia's door.
    As whiles within the mighty heaven the winds are making war,
    And equal heart they have thereto, and equal might they wield:
    Yields none to none, nor yields the rack, nor aught the waters yield;
    Long hangs the battle; locked they stand, all things are striving then:
    Not otherwise the Trojan host and host of Latin men                  360
    Meet foot to foot, and man to man, close pressing in the fray.

    But in another place, where erst the torrent in its way
    Had driven the rolling rocks along and torn trees of the banks,
    Did Pallas see the Arcadian folk, unused to fight in ranks
    Of footmen, turn their backs before the Latins in the chase,
    Since they forsooth had left their steeds for roughness of the place:
    Wherefore he did the only deed that failing Fortune would,
    Striving with prayers and bitter words to make their valour good:

    "Where flee ye, fellows? Ah, I pray, by deeds that once were bold,
    By name of King Evander dear, by glorious wars of old,               370
    By my own hope of praise that springs to mate my father's praise,
    Trust not your feet! with point and edge ye needs must cleave your ways
    Amidst the foe. Where yon array of men doth thickest wend,
    Thither our holy fatherland doth you and Pallas send:
    No Gods weigh on us; mortal foes meet mortal men today;
    As many hands we have to use, as many lives to pay.
    Lo, how the ocean shuts us in with yonder watery wall!
    Earth fails for flight--what! seaward then, or Troyward shall we fall?"

    Thus said, forthwith he breaketh in amid the foeman's press,
    Whom Lagus met the first of all, by Fate's unrighteousness           380
    Drawn thitherward: him, while a stone huge weighted he upheaves,
    He pierceth with a whirling shaft just where the backbone cleaves
    The ribs atwain, and back again he wrencheth forth the spear
    Set mid the bones: nor him the more did Hisbo take unware,
    Though that he hoped; for Pallas next withstood him, rushing on
    All heedless-wild at that ill death his fellow fair had won,
    And buried all his sword deep down amid his wind-swelled lung.
    Then Sthenelus he meets, and one from ancient Rhoetus sprung,
    Anchemolus, who dared defile his own stepmother's bed.
    Ye also on Rutulian lea twin Daucus' sons lay dead,                  390
    Larides, Thymber; so alike, O children, that by nought
    Your parents knew you each from each, and sweet the error thought.

    But now to each did Pallas give a cruel marking-sign;
    For, Thymber, the Evandrian sword smote off that head of thine:
    And thy lopped right, Larides, seeks for that which was its lord,
    The half-dead fingers quiver still and grip unto the sword.

    But now the Arcadians cheered by words, beholding his great deed,
    The mingled shame and sorrow arm and 'gainst the foeman lead.
    Then Pallas thrusteth Rhoeteus through a-flitting by in wain;
    And so much space, so much delay, thereby did Ilus gain,             400
    For 'twas at Ilus from afar that he his spear had cast
    But Rhoeteus met it on the road fleeing from you full fast,
    Best brethren, Teuthras, Tyres there: down from the car rolled he,
    And with the half-dead heel of him beat the Rutulian lea.

    As when amidst the summer-tide he gains the wished-for breeze,
    The shepherd sets the sparkled flame amid the thicket trees,
    The wood's heart catches suddenly, the flames spread into one,
    And fearful o'er the meadows wide doth Vulcan's army run,
    While o'er the flames the victor sits and on their joy looks down.
    No less the valour of thy folk unto a head was grown                 410
    To help thee, Pallas: but behold, Halesus, fierce in field,
    Turns on the foe, and gathers him 'neath cover of his shield.
    Ladon, Pheres, Demodocus, all these he slaughtered there;
    With gleaming sword he lopped the hand Strymonius did uprear
    Against his throat: in Thoas' face withal a stone he sent,
    And drave apart the riven bones with blood and brains all blent
    Halesus' sire, the wise of Fate, in woods had hidden him;
    But when that elder's whitening eyes at last in death did swim,
    Fate took Halesus, hallowing him to King Evander's blade:
    For Pallas aimeth at him now, when such wise he had prayed:          420

    "O Father Tiber, grant this spear, that herewithal I shake,
    Through hard Halesus' breast forthwith a happy way may take;
    So shall thine oak-tree have the arms, the warrior's battle-spoil."

    The God heard: while Halesus shields Imaon in the broil,
    To that Arcadian shaft he gives his luckless body bared.
    But nought would Lausus, lord of war, let all his host be scared,
    E'en at the death of such a man: first Abas doth he slay,
    Who faces him, the very knot and holdfast of the play.
    Then fall Arcadia's sons to field; felled is Etruria's host,
    And ye, O Teucrian bodies, erst by Grecian death unlost.             430
    Then meet the hosts with lords well-matched and equal battle-might;
    The outskirts of the battle close, nor 'mid the press of fight
    May hand or spear move: busy now is Pallas on this side,
    Lausus on that; nor is the space between their ages wide,
    Those noble bodies: and both they were clean forbid of Fate
    Return unto their lands: but he who rules Olympus great
    Would nowise suffer them to meet themselves to end the play,
    The doom of each from mightier foe abideth each today.

    But Turnus' sister warneth him to succour Lausus' war,
    The gracious Goddess: straight he cleaves the battle in his car,     440
    And when he sees his folk, cries out: "'Tis time to leave the fight!
    Lone against Pallas do I fare, Pallas is mine of right;
    I would his sire himself were here to look upon the field."

    He spake, and from the space forbid his fellow-folk did yield,
    But when the Rutuli were gone, at such a word of pride
    Amazed, the youth on Turnus stares, and lets his gaze go wide
    O'er the huge frame, and from afar with stern eyes meets it all,
    And 'gainst the words the tyrant spake such words from him there fall:

    "Now shall I win me praise of men for spoiling of a King,
    Or for a glorious death: my sire may outface either thing:           450
    Forbear thy threats."
                          He spake, and straight amid the war-field drew;
    But cold in that Arcadian folk therewith the heart-blood grew;
    While Turnus from his war-wain leapt to go afoot to fight:
    And as a lion sees afar from off his watch burg's height
    A bull at gaze amid the mead with battle in his thought,
    And flies thereto, so was the shape of coming Turnus wrought.

    But now, when Pallas deemed him come within the cast of spear,
    He would be first, if Fate perchance should help him swift  sword from right hand of the wall
    And smiteth; and his helm and head, struck off with that one blow,
    Lie far away: Amycus then, the wood-deer's wasting foe,              770
    He slayeth: happier hand had none in smearing of the shaft
    And arming of the iron head the poison-wound to waft.
    Then Clytius, son of AEolus, and Cretheus Muse-beloved,--
    Cretheus the Muses' fellow-friend, whose heart was ever moved
    By song and harp, and measured sound along the strained string;
    Who still of steeds, and arms, and men, and battle-tide would sing.

    At last the Trojan dukes of men, Mnestheus, Serestus fierce,
    Draw to a head when all this death is borne unto their ears,
    And see their folk all scattering wide, the foe amidst them see.     779
    Then Mnestheus cries: "And whither now, and whither will ye flee?
    What other walls, what other town have ye a hope to find?
    Hath one man, O my town-fellows, whom your own ramparts bind,
    Wrought such a death and unavenged amid your very town,
    And sent so many lords of war by Orcus' road adown?
    O dastards, your unhappy land, your Gods of ancient days,
    Your great AEneas--what! no shame, no pity do they raise?"

    Fired by such words, they gather heart and stand in close array,
    Till step by step 'gins Turnus now to yield him from the play,
    And seek the river and the side the wet wave girds about.
    Then fiercer fall the Teucrians on, and raise a mighty shout,        790
    And lock their ranks: as when a crowd of men-folk and of spears
    Falls on a lion hard of heart, and he, beset by fears,
    But fierce and grim-eyed, yieldeth way, though anger and his worth
    Forbid him turn his back about: no less to fare right forth
    Through spears and men avails him not, though ne'er so fain he be.
    Not otherwise unhasty feet drew Turnus doubtfully
    Abackward, all his heart a-boil with anger's overflow.
    Yea, twice, indeed, he falls again amidmost of the foe,
    And twice more turns to huddled flight their folk along the walls;
    But, gathered from the camp about, the whole host on him falls,      800
    Nor durst Saturnian Juno now his might against them stay;
    For Jupiter from heaven hath sent Iris of airy way,
    No soft commands of his high doom bearing his sister down,
    If Turnus get him not away from Troy's high-builded town.
    So now the warrior's shielded left the play endureth not,
    Nought skills his right hand; wrapped around in drift of weapon shot
    About his temples' hollow rings his helm with ceaseless clink;
    The starkly-fashioned brazen plates amid the stone-cast chink;
    The crest is battered from his head; nor may the shield-boss hold
    Against the strokes: the Trojans speed the spear-storm manifold,     810
    And lightening Mnestheus thickeneth it: then over all his limbs
    The sweat bursts out, and all adown a pitchy river swims:
    Hard grows his breath, and panting sharp shaketh his body spent.
    Until at last, all clad in arms, he leapt adown, and sent
    His body to the river fair, who in his yellow flood
    Caught him, and bore him forth away on ripple soft and good,
    And gave him merry to his men, washed from the battle's blood.




BOOK X.

ARGUMENT.

THE GODS TAKE COUNSEL: AENEAS COMETH TO HIS FOLK AGAIN, AND DOETH MANY
GREAT DEEDS IN BATTLE.


    Meanwhile is opened wide the door of dread Olympus' walls,
    And there the Sire of Gods and Men unto the council calls,
    Amid the starry place, wherefrom, high-throned, he looks adown
    Upon the folk of Latin land and that beleaguered town.
    There in the open house they sit, and he himself begins:

    "O Dwellers in the House of Heaven, why backward thuswise wins
    Your purpose? Why, with hearts unruled, raise ye the strife so sore?
    I clean forbade that Italy should clash with Troy in war.
    Now why the war that I forbade? who egged on these or those
    To fear or fight, or drave them on with edge of sword to close?       10
    Be not o'ereager in your haste: the hour of fight shall come,
    When dreadful Carthage on a day against the walls of Rome,
    Betwixt the opened doors of Alps, a mighty wrack shall send;
    Then may ye battle, hate to hate, and reach and grasp and rend:
    But now forbear, and joyfully knit fast the plighted peace."

    Few words spake Jove; but not a few in answer unto these
    Gave golden Venus back again:
    "O Father, O eternal might of men and deeds of earth--
    For what else may be left to me whereto to turn my prayers?--
    Thou seest the Rutuli in pride, and Turnus, how he fares?             20
    Amidst them, borne aloft by steeds, and, swelling, war-way sweeps
    With Mars to aid: the fenced place no more the Teucrians keeps,
    For now within the very gates and mound-heaped battlement
    They blend in fight, and flood of gore adown the ditch is sent,
    Unware AEneas is away.--Must they be never free
    From bond of leaguer? lo, again the threatening enemy
    Hangs over Troy new-born! Behold new host arrayed again
    From Arpi, the AEtolian-built; against the Teucrian men
    Tydides riseth. So for me belike new wounds in store,
    And I, thy child, must feel the edge of arms of mortal war.           30
    Now if without thy peace, without thy Godhead's will to speed,
    The Trojans sought for Italy, let ill-hap pay ill deed,
    Nor stay them with thine help: but if they followed many a word
    Given forth by Gods of Heaven and Hell, by whom canst thou be stirred
    To turn thy doom, or who to forge new fate may e'er avail?
    Of ship-host burnt on Eryx shore why should I tell the tale?
    Or of the king of wind and storm, or wild and windy crowd
    AEolia bred, or Iris sent adown the space of cloud?
    But now withal the Gods of Hell, a world untried before,
    She stirreth, and Alecto sent up to the earthly shore                 40
    In sudden hurry raves about towns of Italian men.
    No whit for lordship do I yearn: I hoped such glories then
    While Fortune was: let them be lords whom thou wilt doom for lords!
    But if no land thy hard-heart wife to Teucrian men awards,
    Yet, Father, by the smoking wrack of overwhelmed Troy
    I pray thee from the weapon-dint safe let me send a boy,
    Yea, e'en Ascanius: let me keep my grandson safe for me!
    Yea, let AEneas toss about on many an unknown sea,
    And let him follow wheresoe'er his fortune shall have led:
    But this one let me shield, and take safe from the battle's dread.    50
    Paphus, Cythera, Amathus, are mine, and I abide
    Within Idalia's house: let him lay weed of war aside,
    And wear his life inglorious there: then shalt thou bid the hand
    Of Carthage weigh Ausonia down, and nothing shall withstand
    The towns of Tyre.--Ah, what availed to 'scape the bane of war?
    Ah, what availed that through the midst of Argive flames they bore
    To wear down perils of wide lands, and perils of the main,
    While Teucrian men sought Latin land and Troy new-born again?
    Ah, better had it been for them by Troy's cold ash to stay,
    To dwell on earth where Troy hath been. Father, give back, I pray,    60
    Their Xanthus and their Simois unto that wretched folk,
    And let them toil and faint once more 'neath Ilium's woeful yoke!"

    Then spake Queen Juno, heavy wroth: "Why driv'st thou me to part
    My deep-set silence, and lay bare with words my grief of heart?
    What one of all the Gods or men AEneas drave to go
    On warring ways, or bear himself as King Latinus' foe?
    Fate-bidden he sought Italy?--Yea, soothly, or maybe
    Spurned by Cassandra's wilderment--and how then counselled we
    To leave his camp and give his life to make the winds a toy?
    To trust his walls and utmost point of war unto a boy?                70
    To trust the Tuscan faith, and stir the peaceful folk to fight?
    What God hath driven him to lie, what hardness of my might?
    Works Juno here, or Iris sent adown the cloudy way?
    'Tis wrong for Italy, forsooth, the ring of fire to lay
    Round Troy new-born; for Turnus still to hold his fathers' earth!--
    Though him, Pilumnus' own son's son, Venilia brought to birth--
    But what if Trojans fall with flame upon the Latin folk,
    And drive the prey from off their fields oppressed by outland yoke?
    Or choose them sons-in-law, or brides from mothers' bosoms tear?
    Or, holding peace within their hands, lade ships with weapon-gear?    80
    Thou erst hadst might from Greekish hands AEneas' self to draw,
    To thrust a cloud and empty wind in stead of man of war,
    And unto sea-nymphs ship by ship the ship-host mayst thou change.
    But we to help the Rutuli, 'tis horrible and strange!
    --Unware AEneas is away?--let him abide unware!
    Paphus thou hast, Idalium, and high Cythera fair,
    Then why with cities big with war and hearts of warriors deal?
    What! we it was who strove to wrack the fainting Trojan weal?
    We!--or the one who thwart the Greeks the wretched Trojans dashed?
    Yea, and what brought it all about that thus in arms they clashed,    90
    Europe and Asia? that men brake the plighted peace by theft?
    Did I the Dardan lecher lead, who Sparta's jewel reft?
    Did I set weapons in his hand, breed lust to breed debate?
    Then had thy care for thine been meet, but now indeed o'erlate
    With wrongful plaint thou risest up, and bickerest emptily."

    So pleaded Juno, and all they, the heavenly folk anigh,
    Murmured their doom in diverse wise; as when the first of wind
    Caught in the woods is murmuring on, and rolleth moanings blind,
    Betraying to the mariners the onset of the gale.
    Then spake the Almighty Sire, in whom is all the world's avail,      100
    And as he spake the high-built house of God was quieted,
    And earth from her foundations shook, and heaven was hushed o'erhead,
    The winds fell down, the face of sea was laid in quiet fair:

    "Take ye these matters to your hearts, and set my sayings there;
    Since nowise the Ausonian folk the plighted troth may blend
    With Teucrians, and your contest seems a strife without an end;
    What fortune each may have today, what hope each one shears out,
    Trojan or Rutulan, will I hold all in balanced doubt,
    Whether the camp be so beset by fate of Italy,
    Or hapless wanderings of Troy, and warnings dealt awry.              110
    Nor loose I Rutulans the more; let each one's way-faring
    Bear its own hap and toil, for Jove to all alike is king;
    The Fates will find a way to wend."
                                        He nodded oath withal
    By his own Stygian brother's stream, the pitchy waters' fall,
    And blazing banks, and with his nod shook all Olympus' land.
    Then fell the talk; from golden throne did Jupiter upstand,
    The heaven-abiders girt him round and brought him to the door.

    The Rutuli amid all this are pressing on in war,
    Round all the gates to slay the men, the walls with fire to ring,
    And all AEneas' host is pent with fenced beleaguering.                120
    Nor is there any hope of flight; upon the towers tall
    They stand, the hapless men in vain, thin garland for the wall;
    Asius, the son of Imbrasus, Thymoetes, and the two
    Assaraci, and Thymbris old, with Castor, deeds they do
    In the forefront; Sarpedon's sons, twin brethren, with them bide,
    Clarus and Themon, born erewhile in lofty Lycia's side.
    And now Lyrnessian Acmon huge with strain of limbs strives hard,
    And raises up a mighty stone, no little mountain shard;
    As great as father Clytius he, or brother Mnestheus' might:          129
    So some with stones, with spear-cast some, they ward the walls in fight,
    They deal with fire or notch the shaft upon the strained string.
    But lo amidst, most meetly wrought for Venus cherishing,
    His goodly head the Dardan boy unhooded there doth hold,
    As shineth out some stone of price, cleaving the yellow gold,
    Fair for the bosom or the head; or as the ivory shines,
    That with Orician terebinth the art of man entwines,
    Or mid the boxwood; down along his milk-white neck they lie
    The streams of hair, which golden wire doth catch about and tie.
    The mighty nations, Ismarus, there saw thee deft to speed
    The bane of men, envenoming the deadly flying reed;                  140
    Thou lord-born of Moeonian house, whereby the tiller tills
    Rich acres, where Pactolus' flood gold overflowing spills.
    There, too, was Mnestheus, whom his deed late done of thrusting forth
    King Turnus from the battlements hath raised to heavenly worth,
    And Capys, he whose name is set upon Campania's town.

    But while the bitter play of war went bickering up and down,
    AEneas clave the seas with keel amidst the dead of night:
    For when Evander he had left and reached the Tuscan might,
    He met their king and told his name, and whence his race of old,
    And what he would and how he wrought: and of the host he told,       150
    Mezentius now had gotten him, and Turnus' wrothful heart;
    He warned him in affairs of men to trust not Fortune's part;
    And therewithal he mingleth prayers: Tarchon no while doth wait,
    But joineth hosts and plighteth troth; and so, set free by Fate,
    A-shipboard go the Lydian folk by God's command and grace,
    Yet 'neath the hand of outland duke: AEneas' ship hath place
    In forefront: Phrygian lions hang above its armed tyne
    O'ertopped by Ida, unto those Troy's outcasts happy sign:
    There great AEneas sits, and sends his mind a-wandering wide
    Through all the shifting chance of war; and by his left-hand side    160
    Is Pallas asking of the stars and night-tide's journey dim,
    Or whiles of haps by land or sea that fortuned unto him.

    Ye Goddesses, ope Helicon, and raise the song to say
    What host from out the Tuscan land AEneas led away,
    And how they dight their ships, and how across the sea they drave.

    In brazen Tiger Massicus first man the sea-plain clave;
    A thousand youths beneath him are that Clusium's walls have left
    And Cosae's city: these in war with arrow-shot are deft,
    And bear light quivers of the bark, and bear the deadly bow.

    Then comes grim Abas, all his host with glorious arms aglow,         170
    And on his stern Apollo gleams, well wrought in utter gold.
    But Populonia's mother-land had given him there to hold
    Six hundred of the battle-craft; three hundred Ilva sent,
    Rich isle, whose wealth of Chalyb ore wastes never nor is spent.

    The third is he, who carrieth men the words God hath to say,
    Asylas, whom the hearts of beasts and stars of heaven obey,
    And tongues of birds, and thunder-fire that coming tidings bears.
    A thousand men he hurrieth on with bristling of the spears;
    Pisa, the town Alpheues built amid the Tuscan land,
    Bids them obey.
                    Came Astur next, goodliest of all the band;          180
    Astur, who trusteth in his horse and shifty-coloured weed;
    Three hundred hath he, of one heart to wend as he shall lead:
    And these are they in Caeres' home and Minios' lea that bide,
    The Pyrgi old, and they that feel Gravisca's heavy tide.

    Nor thee, best war-duke, Cinyras, of that Ligurian crew,
    Leave I unsung: nor thee the more, Cupavo lord of few,
    Up from the cresting of whose helm the feathery swan-wings rise.
    Love was thy guilt; thy battle-sign was thine own father's guise.
    For Cycnus, say they, while for love of Phaethon he grieves.
    And sings beneath his sisters' shade, beneath the poplar-leaves;     190
    While with the Muse some solace sweet for woeful love he won,
    A hoary eld of feathers soft about him doth he on,
    Leaving the earth and following the stars with tuneful wails;
    And now his son amid his peers with Tuscan ship-host sails,
    Driving with oars the Centaur huge, who o'er the waters' face
    Hangs, threatening ocean with a rock, huge from his lofty place,
    And ever with his length of keel the deep sea furrows o'er.

    Then he, e'en Ocnus, stirreth up folk from his father's shore,
    Who from the love of Tuscan flood and fate-wise Manto came,
    And gave, O Mantua, walls to thee, and gave his mother's name:       200
    Mantua, the rich in father-folk, though not one-stemmed her home.
    Three stems are there, from each whereof four peoples forth are come,
    While she herself, the head of all, from Tuscan blood hath might.
    Five hundred thence Mezentius arms against himself in fight,
    Whom Mincius' flood, Benacus' son, veiled in the sedges grey,
    Was leading in the fir of fight across the watery way.

    Then heavy-huge Aulestes goes; the oar-wood hundred-fold
    Rises for beating of the flood, as foam the seas uprolled.
    Huge Triton ferries him, whose shell the deep blue sea doth fright:
    Up from the shaggy naked waist manlike is he to sight                210
    As there he swims, but underneath whale-bellied is he grown;
    Beneath the half-beast breast of him the foaming waters moan.

    So many chosen dukes of men in thrice ten keels they sail,
    And cut with brass the meads of brine for Troy and its avail.

    And now had day-tide failed the sky, and Phoebe, sweet and fair,
    Amid her nightly-straying wain did mid Olympus wear.
    AEneas, who might give his limbs no whit of peacefulness,
    Was sitting with the helm in hand, heeding the sail-gear's stress,
    When lo a company of friends his midmost course do meet:
    The Nymphs to wit, who Cybele, the goddess holy-sweet,               220
    Bade turn from ships to very nymphs, and ocean's godhead have.
    So evenly they swam the sea, and sundered wave and wave,
    As many as the brazen beaks once by the sea-side lay;
    Afar they know their king, and round in dancing-wise they play;
    But one of them, Cymodocea, who speech-lore knew the best,
    Drew nigh astern and laid thereon her right hand, with her breast
    Above the flood, the while her left through quiet waves rowed on,
    And thus bespoke him all unware:
                                      "Wak'st thou, O Godhead's son!
    AEneas, wake! and loose the sheets and let all canvas fill!
    We were the pine-trees on a time of Ida's holy hill,                 230
    Thy ship-host once, but sea-nymphs now: when that Rutulian lord
    Fell faithless, headlong, on our lives with firebrand and the sword,
    Unwillingly we brake our bonds and sought thee o'er the main.
    The Mother in her pity thus hath wrought our shape again,
    And given us gift of godhead's life in house of ocean's ground.
    Lo now, the boy Ascanius by dyke and wall is bound
    Amid the spears, the battle-wood that Latins forth have sent.
    And now the horse of Arcady, with stout Etruscans blent,
    Holdeth due tryst. Now is the mind of Turnus firmly set
    To thrust between them, lest thy camp they succour even yet.         240
    Wherefore arise, and when the dawn first climbs the heavenly shore
    Call on thy folk, and take thy shield unconquered evermore,
    The Fire-lord's gift, who wrought its lips with circling gold about:
    Tomorrow's light, unless thou deem'st my words are all to doubt,
    Shall see Rutulian death in heaps a-lying on the land."

    Therewith departing, forth she thrust the tall ship with her hand,
    As one who had good skill therein, and then across the seas
    Swifter than dart she fled, or shaft that matcheth well the breeze,
    And straight the others hastened on. All mazed was he of Troy,
    Anchises' seed, but yet the sign upraised his heart with joy,        250
    And, looking to the hollow heaven, in few words prayed he thus

    "Kind Ida-Mother of the Gods, whose heart loves Dindymus
    And towered towns, and lions yoked and tamed to bear the bit,
    Be thou my battle-leader now, and do thou further it,
    This omen, and with favouring foot the Trojan folk draw nigh."

    But while he spake, Day, come again, had run adown the sky,
    With light all utter perfect wrought, and driven away the night.
    Then folk he biddeth follow on the banners of the fight,
    And make them ready for the play and shape their hearts for war.
    But he, aloft upon the poop, now sees them where they are,           260
    His leaguered Teucrians, as his left uprears the blazing shield;
    And then, the sons of Dardanus up to the starry field
    Send forth the cry, and hope is come to whet their battle-wrath.
    Thick flies their spear-storm: 'tis as when the Strymon cranes give forth
    Their war-sign on the mirky rack, and down the heavens they run
    Sonorous, fleeing southern breeze with clamour following on.
    But wondrous to Rutulian king and dukes of Italy
    That seemed, until they look about, and lo, the keels they see
    Turned shoreward; yea, a sea of ships onsetting toward the shore.
    Yea, and the helm is all ablaze, beams from the crest outpour,       270
    The golden shield-boss wide about a world of flame doth shed.
    E'en so, amid the clear of night, the comets bloody-red
    Blush woeful bright; nor otherwise is Sirius' burning wrought,
    When drought and plagues for weary men the birth of him hath wrought,
    And that unhappy light of his hath saddened all the heaven.
    But nought from Turnus' hardy heart was high hope ever driven
    To take the strand of them and thrust those comers from the shore:
    Eager he chid, hot-heart, with words men's courage he upbore:

    "Lo, now your prayers have come about, that hand meet hand in strife,
    And Mars is in the brave man's hand: let each one's home and wife
    Be in his heart! Call ye to mind those mighty histories,             281
    The praises of our father-folk! Come, meet them in the seas,
    Amid their tangle, while their feet yet totter on the earth:
    For Fortune helpeth them that dare."

    So saying, he turneth in his mind with whom on these to fall,
    And unto whom to leave meanwhile the leaguering of the wall.
    Meanwhile AEneas from his ships high-built his folk doth speed
    Ashore by bridges: many men no less the back-draught heed
    Of the spent seas, and, trusting shoals, they make the downward leap;
    And others slide adown the oars. Tarchon the shore doth sweep,       290
    Espying where the waves break not, nor back the sea doth roar,
    But where the sea-flood harmlessly with full tide swims ashore,
    And thither straight he lays his keels, and prays unto his folk:

    "O chosen, on the stark oars lay! now up unto the stroke;
    Bear on the ships, and with your beaks cleave ye this foeman's earth;
    And let the very keels themselves there furrow them their berth.
    On such a haven nought I heed, though ship and all we break,
    If once we gain the land."
                                Therewith, as such a word he spake,
    His fellows rise together hard on every shaven tree,
    In mind to bear their ships befoamed up on the Latin lea,            300
    Until their tynes are high and dry, and fast is every keel
    Unhurt: save, Tarchon, thine alone, that winneth no such weal;
    For on the shallows driven aground, on evil ridge unmeet,
    She hangeth balanced a long while, and doth the waters beat;
    Then, breaking, droppeth down her men amidmost of the waves,
    Entangled in the wreck of oars, and floating thwarts and staves;
    And in the back-draught of the seas their feet are caught withal.

    No dull delay holds Turnus back; but fiercely doth he fall,
    With all his host, on them of Troy, and meets them on the strand.    309
    The war-horns sing. AEneas first breaks through the field-folk's band,
    --Fair omen of the fight--and lays the Latin folk alow.
    Thero he slays, most huge of men, whose own heart bade him go
    Against AEneas: through the links of brass the sword doth fare,
    And through the kirtle's scaly gold, and wastes the side laid bare.
    Then Lichas smites he, ripped erewhile from out his mother dead,
    And hallowed, Phoebus, unto thee, because his baby head
    Had 'scaped the steel: nor far from thence he casteth down to die
    Hard Cisseus, Gyas huge, who there beat down his company
    With might of clubs; nought then availed that Herculean gear,
    Nor their stark hands, nor yet their sire Melampus, though he were   320
    Alcides' friend so long as he on earth wrought heavy toil.
    Lo Pharo! while a deedless word he flingeth mid the broil,
    The whirring of the javelin stays within his shouting mouth.
    Thou, Cydon, following lucklessly thy new delight, the youth
    Clytius, whose first of fallow down about his cheeks is spread
    Art well-nigh felled by Dardan hand, and there hadst thou lain dead,
    At peace from all the many loves wherein thy life would stray,
    Had not thy brethren's serried band now thrust across the way
    E'en Phorcus' seed: sevenfold of tale and sevenfold spears they wield:
    But some thereof fly harmless back from helm-side and from shield,   330
    The rest kind Venus turned aside, that grazing past they flew;
    But therewithal AEneas spake unto Achates true:

    "Reach me my shafts: not one in vain my right hand now shall speed
    Against Rutulians, of all those that erst in Ilian mead
    Stood in the bodies of the Greeks."
                                        Then caught he a great spear
    And cast it, and it flew its ways the brazen shield to shear
    Of Maeon, breaking through his mail, breaking his breast withal:
    Alcanor is at hand therewith, to catch his brother's fall
    With his right hand; but through his arm the spear without a stay
    Flew hurrying on, and held no less its straight and bloody way,      340
    And by the shoulder-nerves the hand hung down all dead and vain.
    Then Numitor, his brother's spear caught from his brother slain,
    Falls on AEneas; yet to smite the mighty one in face
    No hap he had, but did the thigh of great Achates graze.
    Clausus of Cures, trusting well in his young body's might,
    Now cometh, and with stiff-wrought spear from far doth Dryops smite
    Beneath the chin; home went its weight, and midst his shouting's birth
    From rent throat snatched both voice and life, and prone he smote the ear
    And from his mouth abundantly shed forth the flood of gore.
    Three Thracians also, men whose stem from Boreas came of yore,       350
    Three whom their father Idas sent, and Ismara their land,
    In various wise he fells. And now Halesus comes to hand,
    And his Aruncans: Neptune's seed now cometh thrusting in,
    Messapus, excellent of horse. Hard strife the field to win!
    On this side and on that they play about Ausonia's door.
    As whiles within the mighty heaven the winds are making war,
    And equal heart they have thereto, and equal might they wield:
    Yields none to none, nor yields the rack, nor aught the waters yield;
    Long hangs the battle; locked they stand, all things are striving then:
    Not otherwise the Trojan host and host of Latin men                  360
    Meet foot to foot, and man to man, close pressing in the fray.

    But in another place, where erst the torrent in its way
    Had driven the rolling rocks along and torn trees of the banks,
    Did Pallas see the Arcadian folk, unused to fight in ranks
    Of footmen, turn their backs before the Latins in the chase,
    Since they forsooth had left their steeds for roughness of the place:
    Wherefore he did the only deed that failing Fortune would,
    Striving with prayers and bitter words to make their valour good:

    "Where flee ye, fellows? Ah, I pray, by deeds that once were bold,
    By name of King Evander dear, by glorious wars of old,               370
    By my own hope of praise that springs to mate my father's praise,
    Trust not your feet! with point and edge ye needs must cleave your ways
    Amidst the foe. Where yon array of men doth thickest wend,
    Thither our holy fatherland doth you and Pallas send:
    No Gods weigh on us; mortal foes meet mortal men today;
    As many hands we have to use, as many lives to pay.
    Lo, how the ocean shuts us in with yonder watery wall!
    Earth fails for flight--what! seaward then, or Troyward shall we fall?"

    Thus said, forthwith he breaketh in amid the foeman's press,
    Whom Lagus met the first of all, by Fate's unrighteousness           380
    Drawn thitherward: him, while a stone huge weighted he upheaves,
    He pierceth with a whirling shaft just where the backbone cleaves
    The ribs atwain, and back again he wrencheth forth the spear
    Set mid the bones: nor him the more did Hisbo take unware,
    Though that he hoped; for Pallas next withstood him, rushing on
    All heedless-wild at that ill death his fellow fair had won,
    And buried all his sword deep down amid his wind-swelled lung.
    Then Sthenelus he meets, and one from ancient Rhoetus sprung,
    Anchemolus, who dared defile his own stepmother's bed.
    Ye also on Rutulian lea twin Daucus' sons lay dead,                  390
    Larides, Thymber; so alike, O children, that by nought
    Your parents knew you each from each, and sweet the error thought.

    But now to each did Pallas give a cruel marking-sign;
    For, Thymber, the Evandrian sword smote off that head of thine:
    And thy lopped right, Larides, seeks for that which was its lord,
    The half-dead fingers quiver still and grip unto the sword.

    But now the Arcadians cheered by words, beholding his great deed,
    The mingled shame and sorrow arm and 'gainst the foeman lead.
    Then Pallas thrusteth Rhoeteus through a-flitting by in wain;
    And so much space, so much delay, thereby did Ilus gain,             400
    For 'twas at Ilus from afar that he his spear had cast
    But Rhoeteus met it on the road fleeing from you full fast,
    Best brethren, Teuthras, Tyres there: down from the car rolled he,
    And with the half-dead heel of him beat the Rutulian lea.

    As when amidst the summer-tide he gains the wished-for breeze,
    The shepherd sets the sparkled flame amid the thicket trees,
    The wood's heart catches suddenly, the flames spread into one,
    And fearful o'er the meadows wide doth Vulcan's army run,
    While o'er the flames the victor sits and on their joy looks down.
    No less the valour of thy folk unto a head was grown                 410
    To help thee, Pallas: but behold, Halesus, fierce in field,
    Turns on the foe, and gathers him 'neath cover of his shield.
    Ladon, Pheres, Demodocus, all these he slaughtered there;
    With gleaming sword he lopped the hand Strymonius did uprear
    Against his throat: in Thoas' face withal a stone he sent,
    And drave apart the riven bones with blood and brains all blent
    Halesus' sire, the wise of Fate, in woods had hidden him;
    But when that elder's whitening eyes at last in death did swim,
    Fate took Halesus, hallowing him to King Evander's blade:
    For Pallas aimeth at him now, when such wise he had prayed:          420

    "O Father Tiber, grant this spear, that herewithal I shake,
    Through hard Halesus' breast forthwith a happy way may take;
    So shall thine oak-tree have the arms, the warrior's battle-spoil."

    The God heard: while Halesus shields Imaon in the broil,
    To that Arcadian shaft he gives his luckless body bared.
    But nought would Lausus, lord of war, let all his host be scared,
    E'en at the death of such a man: first Abas doth he slay,
    Who faces him, the very knot and holdfast of the play.
    Then fall Arcadia's sons to field; felled is Etruria's host,
    And ye, O Teucrian bodies, erst by Grecian death unlost.             430
    Then meet the hosts with lords well-matched and equal battle-might;
    The outskirts of the battle close, nor 'mid the press of fight
    May hand or spear move: busy now is Pallas on this side,
    Lausus on that; nor is the space between their ages wide,
    Those noble bodies: and both they were clean forbid of Fate
    Return unto their lands: but he who rules Olympus great
    Would nowise suffer them to meet themselves to end the play,
    The doom of each from mightier foe abideth each today.

    But Turnus' sister warneth him to succour Lausus' war,
    The gracious Goddess: straight he cleaves the battle in his car,     440
    And when he sees his folk, cries out: "'Tis time to leave the fight!
    Lone against Pallas do I fare, Pallas is mine of right;
    I would his sire himself were here to look upon the field."

    He spake, and from the space forbid his fellow-folk did yield,
    But when the Rutuli were gone, at such a word of pride
    Amazed, the youth on Turnus stares, and lets his gaze go wide
    O'er the huge frame, and from afar with stern eyes meets it all,
    And 'gainst the words the tyrant spake such words from him there fall:

    "Now shall I win me praise of men for spoiling of a King,
    Or for a glorious death: my sire may outface either thing:           450
    Forbear thy threats."
                          He spake, and straight amid the war-field drew;
    But cold in that Arcadian folk therewith the heart-blood grew;
    While Turnus from his war-wain leapt to go afoot to fight:
    And as a lion sees afar from off his watch burg's height
    A bull at gaze amid the mead with battle in his thought,
    And flies thereto, so was the shape of coming Turnus wrought.

    But now, when Pallas deemed him come within the cast of spear,
    He would be first, if Fate perchance should help him swift to dare,
    And his less might, and thus he speaks unto the boundless sky:
    "Now by my father's guesting-tide and board thou drew'st anigh,      460
    A stranger, O Alcides, help this great deed I begin!
    His bloody gear from limbs half-dead let Turnus see me win;
    And on the dying eyes of him be victor's image pressed."

    Alcides heard the youth, and 'neath the inmost of his breast
    He thrust aback a heavy groan, and empty tears he shed:
    But to his son in kindly wise such words the Father said:
    "His own day bideth every man; short space that none may mend
    Is each man's life: but yet by deeds wide-spreading fame to send,
    Man's valour hath this work to do: 'neath Troy's high-builded wall
    How many sons of God there died: yea there he died withal,           470
    Sarpedon my own progeny. Yea too and Turnus' Fates
    Are calling him: he draweth nigh his life's departing-gates."

    He spake and turned his eyes away from fields of Rutuli:
    But Pallas with great gathered strength the spear from him let fly,
    And drew therewith from hollow sheath his sword all eager-bright.
    The spear flew gleaming where the arms rise o'er the shoulder's height,
    Smote home, and won its way at last through the shield's outer rim,
    And Turnus' mighty body reached and grazed the flesh of him.
    Long Turnus shook the oak that bore the bitter iron head,
    Then cast at Pallas, and withal a word he cast and said:             480
    "Let see now if this shaft of mine may better win a pass!"
    He spake; for all its iron skin and all its plates of brass,
    For all the swathing of bull-hides that round about it went,
    The quivering spear smote through the shield and through its midmost rent
    And through the mailcoat's staying fence the mighty breast did gain.
    Then at the spear his heart-blood warmed did Pallas clutch in vain;
    By one way and the same his blood and life, away they fare;
    But down upon the wound he rolled, and o'er him clashed his gear,
    And dying there his bloody mouth sought out the foeman's sod:
    Whom Turnus overstrides and says:                                    490

    "Hearken Arcadians, bear ye back Evander words well learned:
    Pallas I send him back again, dealt with as he hath earned,
    If there be honour in a tomb, or solace in the earth,
    I grudge it not--AEnean guests shall cost him things of worth."

    So spake he, and his left foot then he set upon the dead,
    And tore the girdle thence away full heavy fashioned,
    And wrought with picture of a guilt; that youthful company
    Slain foully on one wedding-night: bloody the bride-beds lie.
    This Clonus son of Eurytus had wrought in plenteous gold,
    Now Turnus wears it triumphing, merry such spoil to hold.--          500
    --O heart of man, unlearned in Fate and what the days may hide,
    Unlearned to be of measure still when swelled with happy tide!
    The time shall come when Turnus wealth abundantly would pay
    For Pallas whole, when he shall loathe that spoil, that conquering day.

    But Pallas' folk with plenteous groans and tears about him throng,
    And laid upon his battle-shield they bear the dead along.
    O thou, returning to thy sire, great grief and glory great,
    Whom one same day gave unto war and swept away to fate,
    Huge heaps of death Rutulian thou leav'st the meadow still.

    And now no rumour, but sure word of such a mighty ill                510
    Flies to AEneas, how his folk within the deathgrip lie,
    And how time pressed that he should aid the Teucrians turned to fly.
    So all things near with sword he reaps, and wide he drives the road
    Amid the foe with fiery steel, seeking thee, Turnus proud,
    Through death new wrought; and Pallas now, Evander, all things there
    Live in his eyes: the boards whereto that day he first drew near,
    A stranger, and those plighted hands. Four youths of Sulmo wrought,
    And the like tale that Ufens erst into the world's life brought,
    He takes alive to slay them--gifts for that great ghost's avail,
    And with a shower of captive blood to slake the dead men's bale.     520
    Then next at Magus from afar the shaft of bane he sent;
    Deftly he cowered, and on above the quivering weapon went,
    And clasping both AEneas' knees thus spake the suppliant one:

    "O by thy father's ghost, by hope Iulus hath begun,
    I pray thee for my sire and son my life yet let me win:
    I have a high house, silver wrought is dug adown therein,
    A talent's weight, and store therewith of wrought and unwrought gold:
    This will not snatch the victory from out the Teucrian's hold,
    Nor can the life of one alone such mighty matter make."

    So he, but answering thereunto this word AEneas spake:                530
    "Thy gold and silver talent's weight, whereof thou tell'st such store,
    Spare for thy sons! thy Turnus slew such chaffering of war
    When Pallas' death he brought about a little while ago;
    So deems my sire Anchises' ghost, Iulus deemeth so."
    Then with his left he caught the helm and hilt-deep thrust the blade
    Into the back-bent throat of him e'en as the prayer he prayed.

    Not far hence was Haemonides, Phoebus' and Trivia's priest,
    The holy fillets on his brow, his glory well increased
    With glorious arms, and glittering gear shining on every limb.
    Him the King chaseth o'er the field, and, standing over him,         540
    Hides him in mighty dusk of death; whose gleaned battle-gear,
    A gift to thee, O battle-god, back doth Serestus bear.
    Then Caeculus of Vulcan's stem the hedge of battle fills,
    And Umbro cometh unto fight down from the Marsian hills.
    On them his rage the Dardan child let slip. But next his blade
    Anxur's left hand and orbed shield upon the meadow laid.
    Proud things had Anxur said, and deemed his word was matched by might,
    And so perchance he raised his soul up to the heavenly height,
    And hoary eld he looked to see, and many a peaceful year.
    Tarquitius, proud of heart and soul, in glittering battle-gear,      550
    Whom the nymph Dryope of yore to woodland Faunus gave,
    Came thrusting thwart his fiery way; his back-drawn spear he drave,
    Pinning his mail-coat unto him, and mighty mass of shield:
    His vainly-praying head, that strove with words, upon the field
    He swept therewith, and rolling o'er his carcase warm with death,
    Above him from the heart of hate such words as this he saith:

    "Lie there, fear-giver! no more now thy mother most of worth
    Shall load thee with thy father's tomb, or lay thee in the earth:
    Thou shalt be left to birds of prey, or deep adown the flood
    The waves shall bear thee, and thy wounds be hungry fishes' food."   560

    Next Lucas and Antaeus stout, foremost of Turnus' men,
    He chaseth: Numa staunch of heart and yellow Camers then;
    A man from high-souled Volscens sprung, field-wealthiest one of all
    Ausonian men, and lord within the hushed Amyclae's wall.

    E'en as AEgaeon, who they say had arms an hundred-fold,
    And hundred hands, from fifty mouths and maws the wildfire rolled,
    What time in arms against the bolts from Jove of Heaven that flew
    He clashed upon the fifty shields and fifty sword-points drew:
    So conquering, over all the mead AEneas' fury burns                   569
    When once his sword is warm with death: and now, behold, he turns
    Upon Niphaeus' four-yoked steeds, and breasts their very breath.
    But when they see him striding far, and threatening doom and death,
    In utter dread they turn about, and rushing back again,
    They shed their master on the earth and shoreward drag the wain.

    Meanwhile with twi-yoked horses white fares Lucagus midst men,
    His brother Liger by his side, who holdeth rein as then,
    And turneth steed, while Lucagus the drawn sword whirleth wide.
    Them and their war-rage in no wise AEneas might abide,
    But on he rushes, showing huge with upheaved threatening shaft.
    Then Liger cast a word at him:                                       580
    "No steeds of Diomede thou seest, and no Achilles' car
    Or Phrygian fields: this hour shall end thy life-days and the war
    Here on this earth."
                          Such words as these from witless Liger stray,
    But nought in bandying of words the man of Troy would play;
    Rather his mighty battle-shaft he hurled against the foe,
    While Lucagus his horses drives with spear-butt, bending low
    Over the lash, and setteth forth his left foot for the fight.
    Beneath the bright shield's nether rim the spear-shaft takes its flight,
    Piercing his groin upon the left: then shaken from his wain,
    He tumbleth down and rolleth o'er in death upon the plain.           590
    To whom a fierce and bitter word godly AEneas said:

    "Ho, Lucagus! no dastard flight of steeds thy car betrayed,
    No empty shadow turned them back from facing of the foe,
    But thou thyself hast leapt from wheel and let the yoke-beasts go."

    He spake, and caught the reins withal; slipped down that wretched one
    His brother, and stretched forth the hands that little deed had done:
    "By thee, by those that brought thee forth so glorious unto day,
    O Trojan hero, spare my life, and pity me that pray!"

    AEneas cut athwart his speech: "Not so erewhile ye spake.
    Die! ill it were for brother thus a brother to forsake."             600
    And in his breast the sword he drave home to the house of breath.

    Thus through the meads the Dardan Duke set forth the tale of death,
    With rage as of the rushing flood, or whirl-storm of the wind.
    At last they break forth into field and leave their camp behind,
    Ascanius and the lads of war in vain beleaguered.

    Meanwhile to Juno Jupiter set forth the speech and said:
    "O thou who art my sister dear and sweetest wife in one,
    'Tis Venus as thou deemedst, (nought thy counsel is undone),
    Who upholds Trojan might forsooth: they lack fight-eager hand,
    They lack fierce heart and steady soul the peril to withstand!"      610

    To whom spake Juno, meek of mood: "And why, O fairest lord,
    Dost thou so vex me sad at heart, fearing thy heavy word?
    But in my soul were love as strong as once it used to be,
    And should be, thou though all of might wouldst ne'er deny it me,
    That Turnus I should draw away from out the midst of fight,
    That I might keep him safe to bless his father Daunus' sight.
    Now let him die, let hallowed blood the Teucrian hate atone:
    And yet indeed his name and race from blood of ours hath grown;
    He from Pilumnus is put forth: yea, good gifts furthermore
    His open hand full oft hath piled within thine holy door."           620

    To whom air-high Olympus' king short-worded answer made:
    "If for the youth who soon must fall respite of death is prayed,
    And tarrying-time, nor aught thou deem'st but that my doom must stand,
    Then carry Turnus off by flight, snatch him from fate at hand.
    So far thy longing may I please: but if a greater grace
    Lurk 'neath thy prayers, and thou hast hope to change the battle's face,
    And turmoil everything once more, thou feedest hope in vain."

    Then Juno weeping: "Ah, but if thy heart should give the gain
    Thy voice begrudgeth! if 'twere doomed that he in life abide--
    But ill-end dogs the sackless man, unless I wander wide              630
    Away from sooth--Ah, yet may I be mocked of fear-wrought lies,
    And may thy rede as thou hast might be turned to better wise."

    She spake the word and cast herself adown from heaven the high,
    Girt round with rain-cloud, driving on a storm amid the sky,
    And that Laurentian leaguer sought and Ilium's hedge of fight.
    And there she fashioned of the cloud a shadow lacking might:
    With image of AEneas' shape the wondrous show is drest,
    She decks it with the Dardan spear and shield, and mocks the crest
    Of that all-godlike head, and gives a speech that empty flows,
    Sound without soul, and counterfeits the gait wherewith he goes,--   640
    As dead men's images they say about the air will sweep,
    Or as the senses weary-drenched are mocked with dreams of sleep.
    But in the forefront of the fight war-merry goes the thing,
    And cries the warrior on with words and weapons brandishing:
    On whom falls Turnus, and afar hurleth his whizzing spear:
    Then turns the phantom back about and fleeth as in fear.
    Then verily when Turnus deemed he saw AEneas fled.
    With all the emptiness of hope his headlong heart he fed:
    "Where fleest thou, AEneas, then? why leave thy plighted bride?       649
    This hand shall give thee earth thou sought'st so far across the tide."
    So cries he following, brandishing his naked sword on high,
    Nor sees what wise adown the wind his battle-bliss goes by.

    By hap a ship was moored anear unto a ledgy stone,
    With ladders out and landing-bridge all ready to let down,
    That late the King Orsinius bore from Clusium o'er the sea;
    And thereinto the hurrying lie, AEneas' shape, did flee,
    And down its lurking-places dived: but Turnus none the more
    Hangs back, but beating down delay swift runs the high bridge o'er.
    Scarce on the prow, ere Juno brake the mooring-rope atwain,
    And rapt the sundered ship away o'er back-draught of the main.       660
    And there afar from fight is he on whom AEneas cries,
    Still sending down to death's abode an host of enemies;
    Nor any more the image then will seek his shape to shroud,
    But flying upward blendeth him amid the mirky cloud.

    Meanwhile, as midmost of the sea the flood bore Turnus on,
    Blind to the deed that was in hand, thankless for safety won,
    He looketh round, and hands and voice starward he reacheth forth:
    "Almighty Father, deemedst thou my guilt so much of worth?
    And wouldst thou have me welter through such woeful tide of pain?
    Whence? whither? why this flight? what man shall I come back again?
    Ah, shall I see Laurentum's walls, or see my camp once more?         671
    What shall betide the fellowship that followed me to war,
    Whom I have left? O misery to die the death alone!
    I see them scattered even now, I hear the dying groan.
    What do I? what abyss of earth is deep enough to hide
    The wretched man? But ye, O winds, be merciful this tide,
    On rocks, on stones--I, Turnus, thus adore you with good will--
    Drive ye the ship, or cast it up on Syrtes' shoals of ill,
    Where Rutuli and tell-tale Fame shall never find me out!"

    Hither and thither as he spake his spirit swam in doubt,             680
    Shall he now fall upon the point, whom shame hath witless made,
    Amid most of his very ribs driving the bitter blade;
    Or casting him amid the waves swim for the hollow strand,
    And give his body back again to sworded Teucrian band?
    Thrice either deed he fell to do, and thrice for very ruth
    The mightiest Juno stayed his hand and held aback his youth.
    So 'neath a fair and following wind he glideth o'er the sea,
    And to his father's ancient walls is ferried presently.

    Meanwhile, by Jupiter's command, Mezentius props the fight,
    And all ablaze he falleth on the gladdened Teucrian might:           690
    The Tuscan host rush up, and all upon one man alone
    Press on with hatred in their hearts and cloud of weapons thrown.
    Yet is he as a rock thrust out amid the mighty deep
    To meet the raging of the winds, bare to the water's sweep.
    All threats of sea and sky it bears, all might that they may wield,
    Itself unmoved. Dolichaon's son he felleth unto field,
    One Hebrus; Latagus with him, and Palmus as he fled.
    But Latagus with stone he smites, a mighty mountain-shred,
    Amid the face and front of him, and Palmus, slow to dare,
    Sends rolling ham-strung: but their arms he biddeth Lausus bear       700
    Upon his back, and with their crests upon his helm to wend.
    Phrygian Evanthes then he slays, and Mimas, whiles the friend
    Like-aged of Paris; unto day and Amycus his sire
    Theano gave him on the night that she who went with fire,
    E'en Cisseus' daughter, Paris bore: now Paris lies asleep
    In ancient Troy; Laurentian land unknown doth Mimas keep.

    Tis as a boar by bite of hounds from the high mountains driven,
    Who on pine-nursing Vesulus a many years hath thriven,
    Or safe in that Laurentian marsh long years hath had his home,
    And fed adown the reedy wood; now mid the toil-nets come             710
    He stands at bay, and foameth fierce, and bristleth up all o'er,
    And none hath heart to draw anigh and rouse the wrath of war,
    But with safe shouts and shafts aloof they press about the place;
    While he, unhastening, unafeard, doth everywhither face,
    Gnashing his teeth and shaking off the spears from out his back.
    So they, who 'gainst Mezentius there just wrath do nowise lack,
    Lack heart to meet him hand to hand with naked brandished blade,
    But clamour huge and weapon-shot from far upon him laid.

    From that old land of Corythus erewhile had Acron come,
    A Grecian man; half-wed he passed the threshold of his home:         720
    Whom when Mezentius saw afar turmoiling the mid fight,
    Purple with plumes and glorious web his love for him had dight;
    E'en as a lion hunger-pinched about the high-fenced fold,
    When ravening famine driveth him, if he by chance behold
    Some she-goat, or a hart that thrusts his antlers up in air,
    Merry he waxeth, gaping fierce his mane doth he uprear,
    And hugs the flesh he lies upon; a loathsome sea of blood
    Washes the horror of his mouth.
    So merry runs Mezentius forth amid the press of foes,
    And hapless Acron falls, and pounds the black earth mid his throes   730
    With beat of heel; staining the shaft that splintered in the wound.
    Scorn had he then Orodes swift to fell unto the ground
    Amidst his flight, or give blind bane with unknown cast afar;
    He ran to meet him man to man, prevailing in the war
    By nought of guile or ambushing, but by the dint of blade.
    Foot on the fallen then he set, and strength to spear-shaft laid:
    "Fellows, here tall Orodes lies, no thrall in battle throng."
    Then merrily his following folk shout forth their victory-song:
    Yet saith the dying:
                        "Whosoe'er thou art, thou winnest me
    Not unavenged: thy joy grows old: the like fate looks for thee,      740
    And thou the self-same lea shalt hold within a little while!"

    To whom Mezentius spake, his wrath crossed by a gathering smile:
    "Die thou! the Father of the Gods, the earth-abider's lord,
    Will look to me."
                     He drew the spear from out him at the word,
    And iron slumber fell on him, hard rest weighed down his eyes,
    And shut were they for evermore by night that never dies.

    Now Caedicus slays Alcathous; Sacrator ends outright
    Hydaspes; then Parthenius stark and Orses fall in fight
    By Rapo; and Messapus fells strong Clonius, and the son,
    Of Lycaon; one laid alow, by his own steeds cast down,               750
    One foot to foot. Lo Agis now, the Lycian, standeth forth,
    Whom Valerus, that nothing lacked his grandsire's might and worth,
    O'erthroweth: Salius Thronius slays; Nealces, Salius;
    For skilled he was in dart and shaft, far-flying, perilous.

    Now grief and death in Mavors' scales even for each they lie;
    Victors and vanquished, here they slay, and here they fall and die,
    But neither these nor those forsooth had fleeing in their thought.
    But in Jove's house the Gods had ruth of rage that nothing wrought,
    And such a world of troubles sore for men of dying days;
    On this side Venus, and on that Saturnian Juno gaze;                 760
    And wan Tisiphone runs wild amid the thousands there.
    But lo, Mezentius fierce and fell, shaking a mighty spear,
    Stalks o'er the plain.--Lo now, how great doth great Orion sweep
    Afoot across the Nereus' field, the mid sea's mightiest deep,
    Cleaving his way, raised shoulder-high above the billowy wash;
    Or when from off the mountain-top he bears an ancient ash
    His feet are on the soil of earth, the cloud-rack hides his head:
    --E'en so in mighty battle-gear afield Mezentius sped.

    But now AEneas, noting him adown the battle-row,
    Wendeth to meet him; undismayed he bideth for his foe,               770
    Facing the great-souled man, and stands unmoved, a mighty mass:
    Then measuring the space between if spear thereby may pass:
    "Right hand," he cries, "my very God, and fleeing spear I shake,
    To aid! Thee, Lausus, clad in arms that I today shall take
    From body of the sea-thief here I vow for gift of war
    Over AEneas slain."
                      He spake, and hurled the shaft afar
    Loud whistling: from the shield it glanced, and flying far and wide
    Smit glory-great Antores down through bowels and through side:
    Antores friend of Hercules, who, erst from Argos come,               780
    Clung to Evander, and abode in that Italian home:
    There laid to earth by straying wound he looketh on the sky,
    With lovely Argos in his heart, though death be come anigh.

    Then good AEneas cast his spear, and through the hollow round
    Of triple brass, through linen skin, through craftsmanship inwound,
    With threefold bull-hides, pierced the shaft, and in the groin did lie,
    Nor further could its might avail. Then swiftly from his thigh
    AEneas caught his glaive, and glad the Tyrrhene blood to see,
    Set on upon his wildered foe hot-heart and eagerly.
    But Lausus, by his father's love sore moved, did all behold,
    And groaned aloud, while o'er his cheeks a heavy tear-flood rolled   790
    --Ah, I will tell of thine ill-fate and deeds that thou hast done;
    If any troth in stories told may reach from yore agone,
    My speech, O unforgotten youth, in nowise shalt thou lack--
    The father with a halting foot hampered and spent drew back,
    Still dragging on the foeman's spear that hung amid his shield;
    But mingling him in battle-rush the son took up the field,
    And as AEneas' right hand rose well laden with the blow
    He ran beneath, bore off the sword, and stayed the eager foe,
    And with a mighty shout behind his fellows follow on,
    While shielded by his son's defence the father gat him gone,         800
    And shafts they cast and vex the foe with weapon shot afar.
    Mad wroth AEneas grows, but bides well covered from the war;
    And as at whiles the clouds come down with furious pelt of hail,
    And every driver of the plough the beaten lea doth fail,
    And every one that works afield, while safe the traveller lurks
    In castle of the river-bank or rock-wrought cloister-works,
    The while the rain is on the earth, that they may wear the day
    When once again the sun comes back;--so on AEneas lay
    The shaft-storm, so the hail of fight loud thundering he abode,
    And Lausus with the wrath of words, Lausus with threats did load.    810
    "Ah, whither rushest thou to die, and darest things o'ergreat?
    Thy love betrays thine heedless heart."
                                           No less, the fool of fate,
    He rusheth on, till high and fierce the tide of wrath doth win
    O'er heart of that Dardanian duke, and now the Parcae spin
    Lausus' last thread: for his stark sword AEneas drives outright
    Through the young body, hiding it hilt-deep therein from light
    It pierced the shield and glittering gear wherewith he threatened war,
    And kirtle that his mother erst with gold had broidered o'er,
    And flooded all his breast with blood; and woeful down the wind
    His spirit sought the under-world, and left his corpse behind.       820

    But when Anchises' son beheld the face of that dead man,
    His face that in a wondrous wise grew faded out and wan,
    Groaning for ruth his hand therewith down toward him did he move,
    For o'er his soul the image came of his own father's love:
    "O boy, whom all shall weep, what then for such a glorious deed,
    What gift can good AEneas give, thy bounteous valour's meed?
    Keep thou the arms thou joyedst in. I give thy body here
    Unto thy father's buried ghosts, if thou thereof hast care.
    But let this somewhat solace thee for thine unhappy death,
    By great AEneas' hand thou diest."
                                     Then chiding words he saith         830
    Unto his fellows hanging back, and lifteth up the dead
    From off the lea, where blood defiled the tresses of his head.

    Meanwhile the father by the wave that ripples Tiber's breast
    With water staunched his bleeding hurt and gave his body rest,
    Leaning against a tree-trunk there: high up amid the tree
    Hangeth his brazen helm; his arms lie heavy on the lea;
    The chosen war-youths stand about: he, sick and panting now,
    Nurseth his neck, and o'er his breast his combed-down beard lets flow.
    Much about Lausus did he ask, and sore to men he spake
    To bid him back, or warning word from his sad sire to take.          840
    But Lausus dead his weeping folk were bearing on his shield;
    A mighty heart, to mighty hand the victory must he yield
    The father's soul foretaught of ill, afar their wail he knew,
    And fouled his hoar hair with the dust, and both his hands upthrew
    Toward heaven aloft; then clinging fast unto that lifeless one:

    "What lust," saith he, "of longer life so held my heart, O son,
    That thee, my son, I suffered thus to bare thee to the bane
    Instead of me; that I, thy sire, health of thy hurts I gain,
    Life of thy death! Ah now at last my exile is become
    A woe unto my weary heart; yea, now the wound goes home.             850
    For I am he who stained thy name, O son, with guilt of mine,
    Thrust forth by Fate from fatherland and sceptre of my line:
    I should have paid the penalty unto my country's hate,
    And given up my guilty soul to death, my very fate.
    I live: I leave not sons of men, nor let the light go by--
    --Yet will I leave them."
                             So he spake, and on his halting thigh
    Rose up, and, howsoe'er his hurt might drag his body down,
    Unvanquished yet, he called his horse, his very pleasures crown,
    And glory; who had borne him forth victorious from all war;
    And thus he spake unto the beast that seemed to sorrow sore:         860

    "Rhoebus, o'erlong--if aught be long to men that pass away--
    Have we twain lived: those bloody spoils shalt thou bring home today,
    And carrying AEneas' head avenge my Lausus' woe.
    Or if our might no more may make a road whereby to go,
    Thou too shalt fall: I deem indeed thou, stout-heart, hast no will
    To suffer other men's commands, or Trojan joy fulfil."

    And therewithal he backeth him, and as he used of old
    Settleth his limbs: good store of shafts his either hand doth hold:
    His head is glittering o'er with brass, and horse-hair shags his crest.
    So midmost of the fight he bears, and ever in his breast             870
    Swelleth the mighty sea of shame and mingled miseries.
    And now across the fight his voice thrice on AEneas cries.
    AEneas knew it well forsooth, and joyfully he prayed:
    "So grant the Father of the Gods! So may Apollo aid
    That thou may'st fall on me in fight!"

    So much he spake, and went his way to meet the foeman's shaft;
    But spake the other: "Bitter wretch, who took'st away my son,
    Why fright me now? by that one way my heart might be undone:
    No death I dread, no God that is, in battle would I spare.
    Enough--I come to thee to die; but first these gifts I bear."        880

    He spake the word, and 'gainst the foe a dart withal he cast,
    And shaft on shaft he lays on him about him flitting fast,
    Wide circling; but the golden boss through all the storm bore out
    Thrice while AEneas faceth him he rides the ring about,
    Casting the weapons from his hand; and thrice the Trojan lord
    Bears round a mighty thicket set in brazen battle-board.
    But when such tarrying wearieth him, such plucking forth of spears,
    And standing in such ill-matched fight the heart within him wears,
    Turning the thing o'er manywise, he breaketh forth to speed
    A shaft amid the hollow brow of that war-famous steed:               890
    Then beating of the air with hoof uprears the four-foot thing
    And with his fallen master falls, and 'neath his cumbering
    Weighs down his shoulders brought to earth, and heavy on him lies.
    Then Trojan men and Latin men with shouting burn the skies,
    And swift AEneas runneth up and pulleth forth his sword,
    And crieth o'er him:
                          "Where is now Mezentius, eager lord?
    Where is the fierce heart?"
                                Unto whom the Tuscan spake, when he
    Got sense again, and breathed the air, and o'er him heaven did see:
    "O bitter foe, why chidest thou? why slayest thou with words?        899
    Slay me and do no wrong! death-safe I came not mid the swords;
    And no such covenant of war for us my Lausus bought:
    One thing I pray, if vanquished men of grace may gain them aught,
    Let the earth hide me! well I know how bitter and how nigh
    My people's wrath draws in on me: put thou their fury by,
    And in the tomb beside my son I pray thee let me lie."

    He saith, and open-eyed receives the sword-point in his throat,
    And o'er his arms in waves of blood his life and soul doth float.




BOOK XI.

ARGUMENT.

TRUCE IS MADE FOR THE BURYING OF THE DEAD: THE LATINS TAKE COUNSEL OF
PEACE OR WAR. CAMILLA'S DEEDS AND DEATH.


    Meanwhile Aurora risen up from bed of ocean wends,
    And King AEneas, though his grief bids him in burying friends
    To wear the day, and though his heart the death of men dismays,
    Yet to the Gods of Dawning-tide the worship duly pays.
    From a great oak on every side the branches doth he shear,
    And setteth on a mound bedight in gleaming battle-gear
    The spoils of King Mezentius: a gift to thee it stood,
    O Might of War! Thereon he set the crest with blood bedewed,
    The broken shafts, the mail-coat pierced amid the foughten field
    With twice six dints: on the left arm he tied the brazen shield,      10
    And round about the neck he hung the ivory-hilted sword.
    Then to his friends, a mighty hedge of duke and battle-lord,
    He turned, and to their joyous hearts these words withal he said:

    "The most is done, and for the rest let all your fears lie dead:
    Lo here the first-fruits! battle-spoil won from a haughty king:
    Lo this is all Mezentius now, mine own hands' fashioning.
    Now toward the King and Latin walls all open lies the way;
    Up hearts, for war! and let your hope foregrip the battle-day,
    That nought of sloth may hinder you, or take you unaware,
    When Gods shall bid the banners up, and forth with men ye fare        20
    From out of camp,--that craven dread clog not your spirits then:
    Meanwhile give we unto the earth these our unburied men,
    The only honour they may have in nether Acheron.
    Come, fellows, to those noble souls who with their blood have won
    A country for us, give those gifts, the last that they may spend.
    And first unto Evander's town of sorrow shall I send
    That Pallas, whom, in nowise poor of valour or renown,
    The black day reft away from us in bitter death to drown."

    With weeping eyes he drew aback, e'en as the word he said,
    Unto the threshold of the place where Pallas, cold and dead,          30
    The old Acoetes watched, who erst of that Parrhasian King,
    Evander, was the shield-bearer, but now was following
    His well-beloved foster-child in no such happy wise;
    But round him were the homemen's band and Trojan companies,
    And Ilian wives with loosened locks in guise of sorrow sore.
    But when AEneas entereth now beneath the lofty door
    From beaten breast great moan they cast up to the starry heaven;
    And wailing of their woeful cheer through all the house is driven.
    The King himself when he beheld the pillowed head at rest,            39
    The snow-white face, the open wound wrought on the smooth young breast
    By that Ausonian spear, so spake amid his gathered tears:

    "O boy bewept, despite the gifts my happy Fortune bears
    Doth she still grudge it thee to see my kingdom glorious,
    Or come a victor back again unto thy father's house?
    Not such the promise that I gave on that departing day
    Unto thy father, whose embrace then sped me on my way
    To mighty lordship, while his fear gave forth the warning word
    That with fierce folk I had to do, hard people of the sword.
    Now he, deceived by empty hope, belike pours forth the prayer,
    And pileth up the gifts for nought upon the altars fair,              50
    While we--in woe with honours vain--about his son we stand,
    Dead now, and no more owing aught to any heavenly hand.
    Unhappy, thou shalt look upon thy dead unhappy son!
    Is this the coming back again? is this the triumph won?
    Is this my solemn troth?--Yet thee, Evander, bides no sight
    Of craven beat with shameful wounds, nor for the saved from fight
    Shalt thou but long for dreadful death.--Woe's me, Ausonian land!
    Woe's me, Iulus, what a shield is perished from thine hand!"

    Such wise he wept him, and bade raise the hapless body dead,
    And therewithal a thousand men, his war-hosts' flower, he sped        60
    To wait upon him on the way with that last help of all,
    And be between his father's tears: forsooth a solace small
    Of mighty grief; a debt no less to that sad father due.
    But others speed a pliant bier weaving a wattle through,
    Of limber twigs of berry-bush and boughs of oaken-tree,
    And shadow o'er the piled-up bed with leafy canopy.
    So there upon the wild-wood couch adown the youth is laid;
    E'en as a blossom dropped to earth from fingers of a maid--
    The gilliflower's bloom maybe, or jacinth's hanging head,
    Whose lovely colour is not gone, nor shapely fashion fled,            70
    Although its mother feedeth not, nor earth its life doth hold.

    Thereon two woven webs, all stiff with purple dye and gold,
    AEneas bringeth forth, which erst with her own fingers fair
    Sidonian Dido wrought for him, and, glad the toil to bear,
    Had shot across the web thereof with thin and golden thread:
    In one of these the youth he wrapped, last honour of the dead,
    And, woeful, covered up the locks that fire should burn away.
    And furthermore a many things, Laurentum's battle-prey,
    He pileth up, and bids the spoil in long array be borne:
    Horses and battle-gear he adds, late from the foemen torn:            80
    And men's hands had he bound aback whom shortly should he send
    Unto the ghosts; whose blood should slake the fire that ate his friend.
    And trunks of trees with battle-gear from foemen's bodies won
    He bids the leaders carry forth, with foemen's names thereon.
    Hapless Acoetes, spent with eld, is brought forth; whiles he wears
    His bosom with the beat of fists, and whiles his face he tears:
    Then forth he falls, and grovelling there upon the ground doth lie.
    They bring the war-wain now, o'errained with blood of Rutuli:
    AEthon his war-horse comes behind, stripped of his gear of state,
    Mourning he goes, and wets his face with plenteous tear-drops great.  90
    Some bring the dead man's spear and helm: victorious Turnus' hand
    Hath all the rest: then follow on the woeful Teucrian band,
    All Tuscans, and Arcadian folk with weapons turned about.

    But now, when all the following folk were got a long way out,
    AEneas stood and groaned aloud, and spake these words withal:
    "Us otherwhere to other tears the same dread war-fates call;
    Undying greetings go with thee! farewell for evermore,
    O mightiest Pallas!"
                        Ending so, to those high walls of war
    He turned about, and went his ways unto his war-folks' home.

    But from the Latin city now were fair speech-masters come,           100
    Half-hidden by the olive-boughs, and praying for a grace,
    That he would give them back their men who lay about the place
    O'erthrown by steel, and let them lie in earth-mound duly dight;
    Since war was not for men o'ercome, or those that lack the light--
    That he would spare his whileome hosts, the kinsmen of his bride.

    But good AEneas, since their prayer might not be put aside,
    Let all his pardon fall on them, and sayeth furthermore:
    "O Latin folk, what hapless fate hath tangled you in war
    So great and ill? From us, your friends, why must ye flee away?
    For perished men, dead thralls of Mars, a little peace ye pray,      110
    But to your living folk indeed fain would I grant the grace.
    I had not come here, save that Fate here gave me home and place:
    No battle with your folk I wage; nay, rather 'twas your lord
    Who left my friendship, trusting him to Turnus' shield and sword.
    For Turnus to have faced the death were deed of better worth:
    If he deems hands should end the war and thrust the Teucrians forth,
    'Twere lovely deed to meet my hand amid the rain of strife;
    Then let him live to whom the Gods have given the gift of life.
    Go ye, and 'neath your hapless ones lay ye the bale-fire's blaze."

    He made an end; but still they stood and hushed them in amaze,       120
    And each on each they turned their eyes, and every tongue refrained,
    Till elder Drances, whom for foe child Turnus well had gained
    By hate-filled charges, took the word, and in such wise began:
    "O great in fame, in dint of war yet greater, Trojan man!
    What praise of words is left to me to raise thee to the sky?
    For justice shall I praise thee most, or battle's mastery?
    Now happy, to our fathers' town this answer back we bear,
    And if good-hap a way thereto may open anywhere,
    Thee to Latinus will we knit--let Turnus seek his own!--
    Yea, we shall deem it joy forsooth about your fateful town:          130
    To raise the walls, and Trojan stones upon our backs to lay."

    Such words he spake, and with one mouth did all men murmur yea.
    For twice six days they covenant; and in war-sundering peace
    The Teucrians and the Latins blent about the woods increase,
    About the hill-sides wander safe; the smitten ash doth know
    The ring of steel; the pines that thrust heaven-high they overthrow;
    Nor cease with wedge to cleave the oak and cedar shedding scent,
    Or on the wains to lead away the rowan's last lament.

    And now the very Winged Fame, with that great grief she bears,
    Filleth Evander's town and house, filleth Evander's ears;            140
    Yea, Fame, who erst of Pallas' deeds in conquered Latium told:
    Rush the Arcadians to the gates, and as they used of old,
    Snatch up the torches of the dead, and with the long array
    Of flames the acre-cleaving road gleams litten far away:
    Then meeteth them the Phrygian crowd, and swells the wailing band;
    And when the mothers saw them come amid the house-built land,
    The woeful town they set afire with clamour of their ill.
    But naught there is hath any might to hold Evander still;
    He comes amidst, and on the bier where Pallas lies alow
    He grovels, and with weeping sore and groaning clings thereto;       150
    And scarce from sorrow at the last his speech might win a way:
    "Pallas, this holdeth not the word thou gavest me that day,
    That thou wouldst ward thee warily in game of bitter Mars:
    Though sooth I knew how strong it is, that first fame of the wars;
    How strong is that o'er-sweet delight of earliest battle won.
    O wretched schooling of my child! O seeds of war begun,
    How bitter hard! O prayers of mine, O vows that none would hear
    Of all the Gods! O holiest wife, thy death at least was dear,
    And thou art happy to be gone, not kept for such a tide.
    But I--my life hath conquered Fate, that here I might abide          160
    A lonely father. Ah, had I gone with the Trojan host,
    To fall amid Rutulian spears! were mine the life-days lost;
    If me, not Pallas, this sad pomp were bringing home today!--
    Yet, Teucrians, on your troth and you no blaming would I lay,
    Nor on our hands in friendship joined: 'twas a foreordered load
    For mine old age: and if my son untimely death abode,
    'Tis sweet to think he fell amidst the thousand Volscians slain,
    And leading on the men of Troy the Latin lands to gain.
    Pallas, no better funeral rites mine heart to thee awards
    Than good AEneas giveth thee, and these great Phrygian lords,         170
    The Tyrrhene dukes, the Tyrrhene host, a mighty company;
    While they whom thine own hand hath slain great trophies bear for thee.
    Yea, Turnus, thou wert standing there, a huge trunk weapon-clad,
    If equal age, if equal strength from lapse of years ye had.
    --But out!--why should a hapless man thus stay the Teucrian swords?
    Go, and be mindful to your king to carry these my words:
    If here by loathed life I bide, with Pallas dead and gone,
    Thy right hand is the cause thereof, which unto sire and son
    Owes Turnus, as thou wottest well: no other place there is
    Thy worth and fate may fill. God wot I seek no life-days' bliss,     180
    But might I bear my son this tale amid the ghosts of earth!"

    Meanwhile the loveliness of light Aurora brought to birth
    For heartsick men, and brought aback the toil of heart and hand:
    Father AEneas therewithal down on the hollow strand,
    And Tarchon with him, rear the bales; and each man thither bears
    His dead friend in the ancient guise: beneath the black flame flares,
    The heaven aloft for reek thereof with night is overlaid:
    Three times about the litten bales in glittering arms arrayed
    They run the course; three times on steed they beat the earth about
    Those woeful candles of the dead and sing their wailing out;         190
    The earth is strewn with tears of men, and arms of men forlorn,
    And heavenward goes the shout of men and blaring of the horn:
    But some upon the bale-fires cast gear stripped from Latins slain:
    War-helms, and well-adorned swords, and harness of the rein,
    And glowing wheels: but overwell some knew the gifts they brought,
    The very shields of their dead friends and weapons sped for nought.
    Then oxen manifold to Death all round about they slay,
    And bristled boars, and sheep they snatch from meadows wide away,
    And hew them down upon the flame; then all the shore about
    They gaze upon their burning friends, and watch the bale-fires out.  200
    Nor may they tear themselves away until the dewy night
    Hath turned the heavens about again with gleaming stars bedight.

    Nor less the unhappy Latins build upon another stead
    The bale-fires numberless of tale: but of their warriors dead,
    A many bodies there they dig into the earth adown,
    And bear them into neighbouring lands, or back into the town:
    The rest, a mighty heap of death piled up confusedly,
    Untold, unhonoured, there they burn: then that wide-lying lea
    Glareth with fires that thick and fast keep rising high and high.
    But when the third dawn drew away cold shadows from the sky,         210
    Weeping, great heaps of ashes there and blended bones they made,
    And over them the weight of earth yet warm with fire they laid.

    But in the houses, in the town of that rich Latin king
    More heavy was the wail, more sore the long-drawn sorrowing:
    Here mothers, wretched fosterers here, here sisters loved and lorn,
    And sorrowing sore, and lads whose lives from fathers' care were torn,
    Were cursing of the cruel war, and Turnus and his bride,
    "He, he, in arms, he with the sword should play it out," they cried,
    "Who claims the realm of Italy and foremost lordship there."
    And bitter Drances weights the scale, and witnessing doth bear       220
    That Turnus only is called forth, the battle-bidden man.
    But divers words of many folk on Turnus' side yet ran,
    And he was cloaked about withal by great Amata's name,
    And plenteous signs of battle won upheld his fair-won fame.

    Now midst these stirs and flaming broils the messengers are here
    From Diomedes' mighty walls; and little is the cheer
    Wherewith they bring the tidings back that every whit hath failed
    Their toil and pains: that not a whit hath gold or gifts availed,
    Or mighty prayers, that Latin folk some other stay in war
    Must seek, or from the Trojan king a craven peace implore.           230
    Then e'en Latinus' counsel failed amid such miseries:
    The wrath of God, the tombs new-wrought that lay before their eyes,
    Made manifest AEneas come by will of God and Fate.
    Therefore a mighty parliament, the firstlings of estate,
    By his commandment summoned there, unto his house he brings.
    Wherefore they gather, streaming forth unto that house of kings
    By the thronged ways: there in the midst Latinus sitteth now,
    First-born of years, first lord of rule, with little joyful brow.

    Hereon the men come back again from that AEtolian wall
    He biddeth tell their errand's speed, what answers did befall,       240
    Each in their order: thereupon for speech was silence made,
    And Venulus, obeying him, suchwise began and said:

    "Friends, we have looked on Diomede and on the Argive home,
    And all the road and every hap thereby have overcome:
    Yea, soothly, we have touched the hand that wracked the Ilian earth:
    Argyripa he buildeth there, named from his land of birth,
    In Iapygian Garganus, where he hath conquered place.
    Where, entered in, and leave being given to speak before his face,
    We gave our gifts, and told our names, and whence of lands we were,
    Who waged us war, and for what cause to Arpi we must fare.           250
    He hearkened and from quiet mouth gave answer thus again:

    "'O happy folk of Saturn's land, time-old Ausonian men,
    What evil hap hath turmoiled you amid your peaceful life,
    Beguiling you to stir abroad the doubtfulness of strife?
    All we who on the Ilian fields with sword-edge compassed guilt,
    --Let be the war-ills we abode before the wall high built;
    Let be the men whom Simois hides--we o'er the wide world driven,
    Have wrought out pain and punishment for ill deed unforgiven,
    Till Priam's self might pity us. Witness the star of bane
    Minerva sent; Euboea's cliffs, Caphereus' vengeful gain!             260
    'Scaped from that war, and driven away to countries sundered wide,
    By Proteus' Pillars exiled now, must Menelaues bide;
    And those AEtnaean Cyclop-folk Ulysses look upon:
    Of Pyrrhus's land why tell, or of Idomeneus, that won
    To ruined house; of Locrian men cast on the Libyan shore?
    Mycenae's lord, the duke and king of all the Argive war,
    There, on the threshold of his house, his wicked wife doth slay.
    --Asia o'ercome--and in its stead Adultery thwart the way!--
    Ah, the Gods' hate, that so begrudged my yearning eyes to meet
    My father's hearth, my longed-for wife, and Calydon the sweet!       270
    Yea, and e'en now there followeth me dread sight of woeful things:
    My lost companions wend the air with feathery beat of wings,
    Or wander, fowl on river-floods: O woe's me for their woe!
    The voices of their weeping wail about the sea-cliffs go.
    But all these things might I have seen full surely for me stored
    Since then, when on the flesh of God I fell with maddened sword,
    And on the very Venus' hand a wicked wound I won.
    Nay, nay, to no such battles more I pray you drive me on!
    No war for me with Teucrian men since Pergamus lies low;
    Nor do I think or joy at all in ills of long ago.                    280
    The gifts, that from your fatherland unto my throne ye bear,
    Turn toward AEneas. We have stood, time was, spear meeting spear,
    Hand against hand: trust me, who tried, how starkly to the shield
    He riseth up, how blows the wind when he his spear doth wield.
    If two such other men had sprung from that Idaean home,
    Then Dardanus with none to drive to Inachus had come,
    And seen our walls, and Greece had mourned reversal of her day.
    About the walls of stubborn Troy, whatso we found of stay,
    By Hector's and AEneas' hands the Greekish victory
    Was tarried, and its feet held back through ten years wearing by.    290
    Both these in heart and weapon-skill were full of fame's increase,
    But this one godlier: let your hands meet in the plighted peace
    E'en as ye may: but look to it if sword to sword ye bring.'

    "Thus have ye heard, most gracious one, the answer of the King,
    And therewithal what thought he had about this heavy war."

    Scarce had he said, when diverse voice of murmuring ran all o'er
    Those troubled mouths of Italy: as when the rocks refrain
    The rapid streams, and sounds arise within the eddies' chain,
    And with the chatter of the waves the neighbouring banks are filled.
    But when their minds were soothed and all the wildering voices stilled,
    The King spake first unto the Gods, then thus began to say:          301

    "Latins, that ye had counselled you hereon before today
    Was both my will, and had been good: no time is this to fall
    To counsel now, when as we speak the foe besets the wall.
    With folk of God ill war we wage, lords of the Latin town,
    With all-unconquerable folk; no battles wear them down;
    Yea, beaten never have they heart to cast the sword away.
    Lay down the hope ye had to gain AEtolian war-array;
    Let each man be his proper hope. Lo ye, the straits are sore.
    How all things lie about us now by ruin all toppled o'er,            310
    Witness of this the eyes of you, the hands of you have won.
    No man I blame, what valour could hath verily been done:
    With all the manhood of our land the battle hath been fought:
    But now what better way herein my doubtful mind hath thought
    Will I set forth, and shortly tell the rede that is in me:
    Hearken! beside the Tuscan stream I own an ancient lea,
    Which, toward the sunset stretching far, yea o'er Sicanian bounds,
    Aruncans and Rutulians sow, working the rough hill grounds
    With draught of plough, but feeding down the roughest with their sheep.
    Let all this land, and piny place upon the mountain-steep,           320
    Be yielded for the Teucrian peace: the laws let us declare
    For plighted troth, and bid the men as friends our realm to share.
    There let them settle and build walls, if thitherward they yearn;
    But if unto another land their minds are set to turn,
    And other folk, and all they ask is from our shore to flee,
    Then let us build them twice ten ships from oak of Italy,
    Or more if they have men thereto: good store of ship-stuff lies
    Hard by the waves; and they shall show their number and their guise;
    But toil of men, and brass and gear we for their needs will find.
    And now to carry these our words, and fast the troth-plight bind,    330
    Send we an hundred speech-masters, the best of Latin land,
    To seek them thither, stretching forth the peace-bough in the hand,
    And bearing gifts; a talent's weight of gold and ivory,
    The throne therewith and welted gown, signs of my lordship high.
    Take open counsel; stay the State so faint and weary grown."

    Then Drances, ever full of hate, whom Turnus' great renown
    With bitter stings of envy thwart goaded for evermore;
    Lavish of wealth and fair of speech, but cold-hand in the war;
    Held for no unwise man of redes, a make-bate keen enow;
    The lordship of whose life, forsooth, from well-born dam did flow,   340
    His father being of no account--upriseth now this man,
    And piles a grievous weight of words with all the wrath he can.
    "A matter dark to none, and which no voice of mine doth need,
    Thou counsellest on, sweet King: for all confess in very deed
    They wot whereto our fortune drives; but fear their speech doth hide:
    Let him give liberty of speech, and sink his windy pride,
    Because of whose unhappy fate, and evil life and will--
    Yea, I will speak, despite his threats to smite me and to kill--
    So many days of dukes are done, and all the city lies                349
    O'erwhelmed with grief, the while his luck round camps of Troy he tries,
    Trusting to flight, and scaring heaven with clashing of his sword.
    One gift meseems thou shouldest add, most gracious king and lord,
    Unto the many gifts thou bid'st bear to the Dardan folk,
    Nor bow thyself to violence, nor lie beneath its yoke.
    Father, thy daughter nobly wed unto a glorious son,
    And knit the bonds of peace thereby in troth-plight never done.
    Or if such terror and so great upon our hearts doth lie,
    Let us adjure the man himself, and pray him earnestly
    To yield up this his proper right to country and to king:--
    --O why into the jaws of death wilt thou so often fling              360
    Thine hapless folk, O head and fount of all the Latin ill?
    No safety is in war; all we, for peace we pray thee still,
    O Turnus,--for the only pledge of peace that may abide.
    I first, whom thou call'st foe (and nought that name I thrust aside),
    Lo, suppliant to thy feet I come! Pity thy people then!
    Sink thine high heart, and, beaten, yield; surely we broken men
    Have seen enough of deaths, laid waste enough of field and fold.
    But if fame stir thee, if thine heart such dauntless valour hold,
    If such a longing of thy soul a kingly dowry be,
    Dare then, and trust thee in thy might, and breast the enemy.        370
    Forsooth all we, that Turnus here a queenly wife might gain--
    We common souls--a heap unwept, unburied, strew the plain.
    And now for thy part, if in thee some valour hath a place
    Or memory of the ancient wars, go look him in the face
    Who calleth thee to come afield."

    But Turnus' fury at the word outbrake in sudden flame.
    He groaned, and from his inmost soul this speech of his outpoured:
    "O Drances, when the battle-day calleth for hand and sword,
    Great words good store thou givest still, and first thou comest still
    When so the Sires are called: but why with words the council fill?   380
    Big words aflying from thee safe, while yet the walls hold good
    Against the foe, nor yet the ditch is swimming with our blood.
    Go, thunder out thy wonted words! lay craven fear on me,
    O Drances, thou, whose hand has heaped the Teucrian enemy
    Dead all about, and everywhere has glorified the meads
    With war-spoil! Thou thyself may'st try how lively valour speeds!
    'Tis well the time: forsooth the road lieth no long way out
    To find the foe! on every side they hedge the wall about
    Go we against them!--tarriest thou? and is thy Mars indeed
    A dweller in the windy tongue and feet well learned in speed,        390
    The same today as yesterday?
    --I beaten! who of right, O beast! shall brand me beaten man,
    That seeth the stream of Ilian blood swelling the Tiber's flow,
    Who seeth all Evander's house uprooted, laid alow;
    Who seeth those Arcadian men stripped of their battle-gear?
    Big Pandarus, stout Bitias, found me no craven there,
    Or all the thousand whom that day to Tartarus I sent,
    When I was hedged by foeman's wall and mound's beleaguerment
    No health in war? Fool, sing such song to that Dardanian head,       399
    And thine own day! cease not to fright all things with mighty dread.
    Cease not to puff up with thy pride the poor twice-conquered folk,
    And lay upon the Latin arms the weight of wordy yoke.
    Yea, sure the chiefs of Myrmidons quake at the Phrygian sword,
    Tydides and Achilles great, the Larissaean lord;
    And Aufidus the flood flees back unto the Hadriac sea.
    But now whereas this guile-smith fains to dread mine enmity,
    And whetteth with a fashioned fear the bitter point of strife--
    Nay, quake no more! for this mine hand shall spill no such a life;
    But it shall dwell within thy breast and have thee for a mate.--
    Now, Father, unto thee I turn, and all thy words of weight;          410
    If every hope of mending war thou verily lay'st down;
    If we are utterly laid waste, and, being once overthrown,
    Have fallen dead; if Fate no more may turn her feet about,
    Then pray we peace, and deedless hands, e'en as we may, stretch out.
    Yet if of all our ancient worth some little yet abide,
    I deem him excellent of men, craftsmaster of his tide,
    A noble heart, who, lest his eyes should see such things befall,
    Hath laid him down in death, and bit the earth's face once for all.
    And if we still have store of force, and crop of youth unlaid,
    And many a town, and many a folk of Italy to aid;                    420
    And if across a sea of blood the Trojan glory came,
    And they too died, and over all with one blast and the same
    The tempest swept; why shameless thus do our first footsteps fail?
    Why quake our limbs, yea e'en before they feel the trumpet's gale?
    A many things the shifting time, the long laborious days,
    Have mended oft: a many men hath Fortune's wavering ways
    Made sport of, and brought back again to set on moveless rock.
    The AEtolian and his Arpi host help not our battle-shock.
    Yet is Messapus ours, and ours Tolumnius fortunate,
    And many a duke and many a folk; nor yet shall tarry late            430
    The glory of our Latin lords and this Laurentian lea.
    Here too Camilla, nobly born of Volscian stock, shall be,
    Leading her companies of horse that blossom brass all o'er.
    But if the Teucrians me alone are calling to the war,
    And thus 'tis doomed, and I so much the common good withstand--
    Well, victory hath not heretofore so fled my hated hand
    That I should falter from the play with such a prize in sight:
    Fain shall I face him, yea, though he outgo Achilles' might,
    And carry battle-gear as good of Vulcan's fashioning,
    For you, and for Latinus here, my father and my king,                440
    I, Turnus, second unto none in valour of old years,
    Devote my life. AEneas calls me only of the peers?
    --O that he may!--not Drances here--the debt of death to pay
    If God be wroth, or if Fame win, to bear the prize away."

    But while amid their doubtful fate the ball of speech they tossed,
    Contending sore, AEneas moved his camp and battle-host;
    And lo, amid the kingly house there runs a messenger
    Mid tumult huge, who all the town to mighty dread doth stir,
    With tidings how the Teucrian host and Tuscan men of war
    Were marching from the Tiber flood, the meadows covering o'er.       450
    Amazed are the minds of men; their hearts with tremor shake,
    And anger stirred by bitter stings is presently awake:
    In haste and heat they crave for arms; the youth cries on the sword,
    The Fathers mutter sad and weep: with many a wrangling word
    A mighty tumult goeth up, and toward the sky doth sweep:
    Not otherwise than when the fowl amid the thicket deep
    Sit down in hosts; or when the swans send forth their shrilling song
    About Padusa's fishy flood, the noisy pools among.

    "Come, fellow-folk," cries Turnus then, for he the time doth seize,
    "Call ye to council even now, and sit and praise the peace,          460
    And let the armed foe wrack the realm!"
                                               Nor more he said withal,
    But turned about and went his ways from that high-builded hall.
    Said he: "Volusus, lead away the Volscian ranks to fight,
    And Rutuli! Messapus, thou, afield with horse and knight!
    Thou, Coras, with thy brother duke sweep down the level mead.
    Let some make breaches good, and some man the high towers with heed;
    And let the rest bear arms with me whereso my bidding sends."

    Then straightway, running in all haste, to wall the city wends.
    Sore shaken in his very heart, by that ill tide undone,
    His council Sire Latinus leaves and those great redes begun:         470
    Blaming himself that he took not AEneas of free will,
    Nor gave the town that Dardan lord the place of son to fill.

    Now some dig dykes before the gate, or carry stones and stakes,
    And bloody token of the war the shattering trump awakes.
    Mothers and lads, a motley guard, they crown the threatened wall,
    For this last tide of grief and care hath voice to cry for all.
    Moreover to the temple-stead, to Pallas' house on high,
    The Queen goes forth hedged all about by matron company,
    And bearing gifts: next unto whom, the cause of all this woe,
    With lovely eyes cast down to earth, doth maid Lavinia go.           480
    They enter and with frankincense becloud the temple o'er,
    And cast their woeful voices forth from out the high-built door:
    "O Weapon-great Tritonian Maid, O front of war-array,
    Break thou the Phrygian robber's sword, and prone his body lay
    On this our earth; cast him adown beneath our gates high-reared!"

    Now eager Turnus for the war his body did begird:
    The ruddy-gleaming coat of mail upon his breast he did,
    And roughened him with brazen scales; with gold his legs he hid;
    With brow yet bare, unto his side he girt the sword of fight,
    And all a glittering golden man ran down the castle's height.        490
    High leaps his heart, his hope runs forth the foeman's host to face:
    As steed, when broken are the bonds, fleeth the stabling place,
    Set free at last, and, having won the unfenced open mead,
    Now runneth to the grassy grounds wherein the mare-kind feed;
    Or, wont to water, speedeth him in well-known stream to wash,
    And, wantoning, with uptossed head about the world doth dash,
    While wave his mane-locks o'er his neck, and o'er his shoulders play.

    But, leading on the Volscian host, there comes across his way
    Camilla now, who by the gate leapt from her steed adown,
    And in likewise her company, who left their horses lone,             500
    And earthward streamed: therewith the Queen such words as this gave forth:

    "Turnus, if any heart may trust in manly might and worth,
    I dare to promise I will meet AEneas' war array,
    And face the Tyrrhene knights alone, and deal them battle-play.
    Let my hand be the first to try the perils of the fight,
    The while the foot-men townward bide, and hold the walls aright."

    Then Turnus answered, with his eyes fixed on the awful maid:
    "O glory of Italian land, how shall the thanks be paid
    Worthy thy part? but since all this thy great soul overflies,
    To portion out our work today with me indeed it lies.                510
    AEneas, as our spies sent out and rumour saith for sure,
    The guileful one, his light-armed horse hath now sent on before
    To sweep the lea-land, while himself, high on the hilly ground,
    Across the desert mountain-necks on for our walls is bound.
    But I a snare now dight for him in woodland hollow way
    Besetting so the straitened pass with weaponed war-array.
    But bear thy banners forth afield to meet the Tyrrhene horse,
    With fierce Messapus joined to thee, the Latin battle-force,
    Yea, and Tiburtus: thou thyself the leader's care shalt take."

    So saith he, and with such-like words unto the war doth wake         520
    Messapus and his brother-lords; then 'gainst the foeman fares.

    There was a dale of winding ways, most meet for warlike snares
    And lurking swords: with press of leaves the mountain bent is black
    That shutteth it on either side: thence leads a scanty track;
    By strait-jawed pass men come thereto, a very evil road:
    But thereabove, upon the height, lieth a plain abode,
    A mountain-heath scarce known of men, a most safe lurking-place,
    Whether to right hand or to left the battle ye will face,
    Or hold the heights, and roll a storm of mighty rocks adown.
    Thither the war-lord wends his way by country road well known,       530
    And takes the place, and bideth there within the wood accursed.

    Meanwhile within the heavenly house Diana speaketh first
    To Opis of the holy band, the maiden fellowship,
    And words of grief most sorrowful Latonia's mouth let slip:
    "Unto the bitter-cruel war the maid Camilla wends,
    O maid: and all for nought indeed that dearest of my friends
    Is girding her with arms of mine."

    Nought new-born was the love
    Diana owned, nor sudden-sweet the soul in her did move:
    When Metabus, by hatred driven, and his o'erweening pride,
    Fled from Privernum's ancient town, his fathers' country-side,       540
    Companion of his exile there, amid the weapon-game,
    A babe he had with him, whom he called from her mother's name
    Casmilla, but a little changed, and now Camilla grown.
    He, bearing her upon his breast, the woody ridges lone
    Went seeking, while on every side the sword-edge was about,
    And all around were scouring wide the weaponed Volscian rout.
    But big lay Amasenus now athwart his very road,
    Foaming bank-high, such mighty rain from out of heaven had flowed.
    There, as he dight him to swim o'er, love of his babe, and fear
    For burden borne so well-beloved, his footsteps back did bear.       550
    At last, as all things o'er he turned, this sudden rede he took:
    The huge spear that in mighty hand by hap the warrior shook,
    A close-knit shaft of seasoned oak with many a knot therein,
    Thereto did he his daughter bind, wrapped in the cork-tree's skin,
    And to the middle of the beam he tied her craftily;
    Then, shaking it in mighty hand, thus spoke unto the sky:
    "O kind, O dweller in the woods, Latonian Virgin fair,
    A father giveth thee a maid, who holds thine arms in air
    As from the foe she flees to thee: O Goddess, take thine own,
    That now upon the doubtful winds by this mine arm is thrown!"        560
    He spake, and from his drawn-back arm cast forth the brandished wood;
    Sounded the waves; Camilla flew across the hurrying flood,
    A lorn thing bound to whistling shaft, and o'er the river won.
    But Metabus, with all the band of chasers pressing on,
    Unto the river gives himself, and reaches maid and spear,
    And, conquering, from the grassy bank Diana's gift doth tear.
    To roof and wall there took him thence no city of the land,
    Nay, he himself, a wild-wood thing, to none had given the hand;
    Upon the shepherd's lonely hills his life thenceforth he led;
    His daughter mid the forest-brake, and wild deers' thicket-stead,    570
    He nourished on the milk that flowed from herd-mare's untamed breast,
    And to the maiden's tender lips the wild thing's udder pressed;
    Then from the first of days when she might go upon her feet,
    The heft of heavy sharpened dart her hand must learn to meet,
    And from the little maiden's back he hung the shaft and bow;
    While for the golden hair-clasp fine and long-drawn mantle's flow
    Down from her head, along her back, a tiger's fell there hung.
    E'en then too from her tender hand a childish shot she flung,
    The sling with slender smoothened thong she drave about her head
    To bring the crane of Strymon down, or lay the white swan dead.      580
    Then many a mother all about the Tyrrhene towns in vain
    Would wed her to their sons; but she, a maid without a stain,
    Alone in Dian's happiness the spear for ever loved,
    For ever loved the maiden life.
                                        --"O had she ne'er been moved
    By such a war, nor dared to cross the Teucrian folk in fight!
    Then had she been a maid of mine, my fellow and delight.
    But since the bitterness of fate lies round her life and me,
    Glide down, O maiden, from the pole, and find the Latin lea,
    Where now, with evil tokens toward, sad battle they awake;
    Take these, and that avenging shaft from out the quiver take,        590
    Wherewith whoso shall wrong with wound my holy-bodied may,
    Be he of Troy or Italy, see thou his blood doth pay:
    And then will I her limbs bewept, unspoiled of any gear,
    Wrap in a hollow cloud, and lay in kindred sepulchre."

    She spoke; the other slipped adown the lightsome air of heaven,
    With wrapping cloak of mirky cloud about her body driven.

    But in meanwhile the Trojan folk the city draw anigh,
    The Tuscan dukes and all their horse in many a company
    Well ordered: over all the plain neighing the steed doth fare,
    Prancing, and champing on the bit that turns him here and there,     600
    And far and wide the lea is rough with iron harvest now.
    And with the weapons tossed aloft the level meadows glow.
    Messapus and the Latins swift, lo, on the other hand;
    And Coras with his brother-lord, and maid Camilla's band,
    Against them in the field; and lo, far back their arms they fling
    In couching of the level spears, and shot spears' brandishing.
    All is afire with neigh of steeds and onfall of the men.
    And now, within a spear-shot come, short up they rein, and then
    They break out with a mighty cry, and spur the maddened steeds;
    And all at once from every side the storm of spear-shot speeds,      610
    As thick as very snowing is, and darkens down the sun.

    And thereon with their levelled spears each against each they run,
    Tyrrhenus and Aconteus fierce: in forefront of the fight
    They meet and crash with thundering sound; wracked are the steeds outright,
    Breast beating in each breast of them: far is Aconteus flung
    In manner of the lightning bolt, or stone from engine slung;
    Far off he falls, and on the air pours all his life-breath out.

    Then wildered is the war array; the Latins wheel about
    And sling their targets all aback, and townward turn their steeds.
    The Trojans follow; first of whom the ranks Asylas leads.            620
    But when they draw anigh the gates once more the Latin men
    Raise up the cry, and turn about the limber necks again;
    Then flee their foes, and far afield with loosened reins they ride;
    As when the sea-flood setting on with flowing, ebbing tide,
    Now earthward rolling, overlays the rocks with foaming sea,
    And with its bosom overwhelms the sand's extremity,
    Now swiftly fleeing back again, sucks back into its deep
    The rolling stones, and leaves the shore with softly-gliding sweep.
    Twice did the Tuscans townward drive the host of Rutuli;
    Twice, looking o'er their shielded backs, afield they needs must fly;  630
    But when they joined the battle thrice knit up was all array
    In one great knot, and man sought man wherewith to play the play.
    Then verily the dying groans up to the heavens went;
    Bodies and arms lie deep in blood, and with the men-folk blent,
    The dying horses wallow there, and fearful fight arose.

    Orsilochus with Remulus had scant the heart to close,
    But hurled his shaft against the horse, and smote him 'neath the ear;
    The smitten beast bears not the wound, but, maddened, high doth rear
    The legs of him and breast aloft: his master flung away,
    Rolls on the earth: Catillus there doth swift Iolas slay;            640
    Yea, and Herminius, big of soul, and big of limbs and gear,
    Who went with head by nothing helmed save locks of yellow hair,
    Who went with shoulders all unarmed, as one without a dread,
    So open unto fight was he; but through his shoulders sped
    The quivering spear, and knit him up twi-folded in his pain.
    So black blood floweth everywhere; men deal out iron bane,
    And, struggling, seek out lovely death amid the wounds and woe.

    But through the middle of the wrack doth glad Camilla go,
    The quivered war-maid, all one side stripped naked for the play;
    And now a cloud of limber shafts she scattereth wide away,           650
    And now with all unwearied hand catcheth the twi-bill strong.
    The golden bow is at her back, and Dian's arrow-song.
    Yea, e'en and if she yielded whiles, and showed her back in flight,
    From back-turned bow the hurrying shaft she yet would aim aright.
    About her were her chosen maids, daughters of Italy,
    Larina, Tulla, and Tarpeia, with brazen axe on high,
    Whom that divine Camilla chose for joy and fame's increase,
    Full sweet and goodly hand-maidens in battle and in peace:
    E'en as the Thracian Amazons thresh through Thermodon's flood,
    When they in painted war-gear wend to battle and to blood:           660
    Or those about Hippolyta, or round the wain of Mars
    Wherein Panthesilea wends, when hubbub of the wars
    The maiden-folk exulting raise, and moony shields uprear.

    Whom first, whom last, O bitter Maid, didst thou overthrow with spear?
    How many bodies of the slain laidst thou upon the field?
    Eunaeus, Clytius' son, was first, whose breast for lack of shield
    The fir-tree long smit through and through, as there he stood in face;
    He poureth forth a sea of blood, and, falling in his place,
    Bites the red earth, and dying writhes about the bitter bane.
    Liris and Pagasus she slays; one, catching at the rein               670
    Of his embowelled steed rolls o'er, the other as he ran
    To aid, and stretched his swordless hand unto the fallen man,
    Fell headlong too, and there they lie: with these Amastus wends,
    The son of Hippotas; her spear in chase of men she sends,
    Harpalycus, Demophooen, Tereus, and Chromis stout
    As many as her maiden hand the whirling darts send out
    So many Phrygian falls there are. Far off, in uncouth gear,
    The hunter Ornytus upon Apulian steed doth fare,
    Whose warring shoulders bigly wrought with stripped-off bullock's hide
    Are covered; but his head is helmed with wood-wolf's gaping wide,    680
    A monstrous mouth, wherein are left the teeth all gleaming white:
    A wood-spear arms the hand of him, he wheels amid the fight,
    And by the head he overtops all other men about.
    Him she o'ertakes, no troublous deed amid the fleeing rout,
    And, slaying him, from bitter heart this word withal she spake:

    "Tuscan, thou deem'dst thee hunting still the deer amid the brake;
    The day has come when women's arms have cast thy boasting back:
    Yet going to thy fathers' ghosts a word thou shalt not lack
    To praise thy life; for thou mayst say, Camilla was my bane."

    Orsilochus and Butes next, two huge-wrought Trojans, gain            690
    Death at her hands: Butes aback she smit through with the spear
    Betwixt the mail-coat and the helm, wherethrough the neck doth peer
    As there he sits, and on his left hangs down the target round;
    But from Orsilochus she flees, wide circling o'er the ground,
    Then, slipping inward of the ring, chaseth the chaser there,
    And, rising high, her mighty axe driveth through bones and gear.
    With blow on blow, mid all his prayers and crying out for grace,
    Until his hot and bloody brain is flooding all his face.

    A man haps on her now, and stands afeard such sight to see;
    Of Aunus of the Apennines the warring son was he,                    700
    Great of Ligurians, while the Fates his guile would yet allow:
    But he, since fleeing out of fight, would nought avail him now,
    Nor knew he how in any wise to turn the Queen away,
    With rede of guile and cunning words began to play the play:

    "What deed of fame, for woman's heart to trust a horse's might?
    Wilt thou not set thy speed aside, and 'gainst me dare the fight
    On equal ground, and gird thyself for foot-fight face to face?
    See then to whom the windy fame shall bring the victory's grace!"

    He spake; but she, in bitter rage, and stung to her heart's root,
    Unto her fellow gave her steed and faced him there afoot,            710
    Most unafeard, with naked glaive and target bare and white.
    Thereat the youth deemed guile had won, and turned at once to flight;
    Nought tarrying but to turn the reins, he fleeth on his road,
    And ever with his iron heel the four-foot thing doth goad.

    "Empty Ligurian, all in vain thine high heart dost thou raise,
    And all in vain thou triest today thy father's crafty ways.
    Nor shall thy lying bring thee safe to lying Aunus' head."

    So spake the maid, and all afire on flying feet she sped,
    Outwent the horse and crossed his road, and catching at the rein,
    There made her foeman pay for all with bloody steel-wrought bane,    720
    As easily the holy hawk from craggy place on high
    In winged chase follows on the dove aloft along the sky,
    And taketh her in hooked hold with bitter feet to tear,
    While blood and riven feathers fall from out the upper air.

    Nathless the Sower of manfolk and all the Godly Kind,
    Upon Olympus set aloft, to this was nothing blind,
    And Tarchon of the Tyrrhene folk he stirreth up to war,
    And stingeth all the heart of him with anger bitter-sore;
    Who, borne on horse 'twixt death of men and faltering war-array,
    Goads on his bands unto the fight, and many a word doth say,         730
    And calleth each man by his name, and bids the beaten stand:

    "What fear, O hearts that nought may shame, O folk of deedless hand,
    What dastardy, O Tyrrhene folk, hath now so caught your souls?
    A woman drives us scattering wide, and back our war-wall rolls.
    Why bear our hands these useless spears, this steel not made for fight?
    Ye are not slack in Venus' play or battle of the night,
    Or when the crooked fife gives sign that Bacchus' dance is toward
    Well wait ye onset of the feast and cups of plenteous board:
    Your love, your hearts, are there, whereas the lucky priest doth bid
    The holy words, and victims fat call to the thickets hid."           740

    He spake, and, fain of death himself, against the foemen spurs,
    And full in face of Venulus his eager body bears,
    And catcheth him by arm about, and tears him from his horse,
    And bears him off on saddle-bow in grip of mighty force:
    Then goes the clamour up to heaven, and all the Latin eyes
    Turn thitherward: but fiery-swift across the field he flies,
    Bearing the weapons and the man; then from his foeman's spear
    Breaks off the head, and searches close for opening here and there
    Whereby to give the deadly wound: the foe doth ever fight,           749
    Thrusting the hand from threatened throat, and puts back might with might.
    As when a yellow erne aloft skyward a dragon draws,
    And knits him up within her feet and gripping of her claws:
    But still the wounded serpent turns in many a winding fold,
    And bristles all his spiky scales, and hissing mouth doth hold
    Aloft against her; she no less through all his struggles vain
    Drives hooked beak, and still with wings beats through the airy plain;
    E'en so from those Tiburtine ranks glad Tarchon bears the prey:
    And, following on their captain's deed, fall on amid the fray
    Maeonia's sons.
                    But Arruns now, the foredoomed man of fate,
    Encompassing Camilla's ways with spear and guile, doth wait          760
    On all her goings; spying out what hap is easiest.
    Now, wheresoe'er the hot-heart maid amid the battle pressed,
    There Arruns winds, and silently holds watch on all her ways:
    And when from forth the foe she comes, bearing the victory's praise,
    Still speedily in privy wise the rein he turns about:
    This way he tries, that way he tries, still wandering in and out
    On all sides; shaking spear of doom with evil heart of guile.

    Now Chloreus, bond of Cybele and priest upon a while,
    Afar as happed in Phrygian gear gleamed out upon his steed,
    Foaming and goodly: clad was he in skin-wrought battle-weed,         770
    With brazen scales done feather-wise, and riveted with gold,
    And grand was he in outland red and many a purple fold;
    Gortynian arrows from afar with Lycian horn he sped;
    Gold rang the bow upon his back; gold-mitred was his head
    In priestly wise; his saffron scarf, the crackling folds of it
    Of linen fine, in knot about a red-gold buckle knit;
    His kirtle was embroidered fair, his hosen outland-wrought.
    The maiden, whether Trojan gear for temple-gate she sought,
    Or whether she herself would wend, glorious in war-got gold,
    Amidst of all the press of arms this man in chase must hold          780
    Blind as a hunter; all unware amidst the war-array
    She burned with all a woman's lust for spoil of men and prey:
    When now, the time at last being seized, from out its lurking-place
    Arruns drew forth his spear, and prayed the Gods above for grace:

    "Highest of Gods, Apollo, ward of dear Soracte's stead,
    Whom we first honour, unto whom the piny blaze is fed;
    Whom worshipping, we, waxen strong in might of godliness,
    The very midmost of the fire with eager foot-soles press--
    Almighty Father, give me grace to do away our shame!
    No battle-gear, no trophies won from vanquished maid I claim,        790
    No spoils I seek; my other deeds shall bring me praise of folk;
    Let but this dreadful pest of men but fall beneath my stroke,
    And me wend back without renown unto my father's place!"

    Apollo heard, and half the prayer he turned his heart to grace,
    The other half he flung away adown the wind to go.
    That he by sudden stroke of death should lay Camilla low,--
    He granted this: that his high house should see his safe return,
    He granted not: the hurrying gusts that word to breezes turn.

    So when the shaft hurled from his hand gave sound upon the air,
    All Volscians turn their hardy hearts, and all men's eyen bear       800
    Upon the Queen: but she no whit had any breeze in mind,
    Or whistle of the spear that sped from out the house of wind,
    Until the hurrying shaft beneath her naked bosom stood,
    And clung there, deeply driven home, drinking her virgin blood.
    Her frighted damsels run to her and catch the falling maid,
    But Arruns fleeth fast, forsooth more than all they afraid--
    Afraid and glad--nor durst he more to trust him to the spear,
    Or 'neath the hail of maiden darts his body forth to bear.
    And as the murder-wolf, ere yet the avenging spear-points bite,
    Straight hideth him in pathless place amid the mountain-height,      810
    When he hath slain some shepherd-lad or bullock of the fold;
    Down goes his tail, when once he knows his deed so overbold,
    Along his belly close it clings as he the woodland seeks.
    Not otherwise from sight of men the wildered Arruns sneaks,
    And mingles in the middle fight, glad to be clear away.

    Death-smitten, at the spear she plucks; amidst her bones it lay,
    About the ribs, that iron point in baneful wound and deep:
    She droopeth bloodless, droop her eyes acold in deadly sleep;
    From out her cheeks the colour flees that once therewith were clear.
    Then, passing, Acca she bespeaks, her very maiden peer,              820
    Her who alone of all the rest might share Camilla's rede,
    A trusted friend: such words to her the dying mouth doth speed:

    "Sister, thus far my might hath gone; but now this bitter wound
    Maketh an end, and misty dark are grown all things around:
    Fly forth, and unto Turnus bear my very latest words;
    Let him to fight, and from the town thrust off the Trojan swords--
    Farewell, farewell!"--
                          And with the word the bridle failed her hold,
    And unto earth unwilling now she flowed, and waxen cold
    Slowly she slipped her body's bonds; her languid neck she bent,
    Laid down the head that death had seized, and left her armament;     830
    And with a groan her life flew forth disdainful into night.

    Then rose the cry and smote aloft the starry golden height,
    And with the Queen so felled to field the fight grew young again,
    And thronged and serried falleth on the Teucrian might and main,
    The Tuscan Dukes, Evander's host, the wings of Arcady.

    But Opis, Dian's watch of war, set on the mountain high,
    A long while now all unafeard had eyed the battle o'er,
    And when far off, amid the cries of maddened men of war,
    She saw Camilla win the death by bitter ill award,                   839
    She groaned, and from her inmost heart such words as these she poured:
    "Alas, O maid, thou payest it o'ermuch and bitterly,
    That thou unto the Teucrian folk the challenge needs must cry.
    Ah, nothing it availed thee, maid, through deserts of the deer
    To worship Dian, or our shafts upon thy back to bear.
    And yet the Queen hath left thee not alone amidst of shame
    In grip of death; nor shalt thou die a death without a name
    In people's ears; nor yet as one all unavenged be told:
    For whosoever wronged thy flesh with wounding overbold
    Shall pay the penalty well earned."
                                          Now 'neath the mountains high,
    All clad with shady holm-oaks o'er, a mighty mound doth lie,         850
    The tomb of King Dercennus called, Laurentum's lord of yore;
    And thitherward her speedy feet that loveliest Goddess bore,
    And there abiding, Arruns spied from off the high-heaped mound
    But when the wretch in gleaming arms puffed up with pride she found,
    "Why," quoth she, "dost thou turn away? Here, hither wend thy feet;
    Come here and perish; take reward for slain Camilla meet!
    But ah, for death of such an one is Dian's arrow due?"

    Then from the Thracian quiver gilt a winged shaft she drew,
    And bent the horn-wrought bow withal with heart on slaying set:
    Far drew she, till the curving horns each with the other met:        860
    Alike she strained her hands to shoot; the left hand felt the steel,
    The right that drew the string aback her very breast did feel.
    Then straightway Arruns heard in one the bow-string how it rung,
    And whistle of the wind; and there the shaft within him clung:
    His fellows leave him dying there and groaning out his last,
    Forgotten in an unknown field, amid the sand downcast;
    While to Olympus on the wing straightway is Opis borne.

    But now first flees Camilla's band, their Queen and mistress lorn,
    And flee the beaten Rutuli, and fierce Atinas flees;
    The Dukes of men in disarray, the broken companies                   870
    Now turn their faces to the town, and seek a sheltering place,
    Nor yet may any turn with spear upon the Teucrian chase,
    That beareth death of men in hand, or bar the homeward road:
    Cast back on fainting shoulders now the loose bow hangs a load;
    The horny hoofs of four-foot things shake down the dusty mead,
    The mirky cloud of rolling dust doth ever townward speed;
    And mothers beating of their breasts stand on the watch-towers high,
    And cast abroad their woman's wail up to the starry sky.
    But they who in their fleeing first break through the open doors,
    In mingled tumult on their backs a crowd of foemen pours;            880
    Nor do they 'scape a wretched death: there, on the threshold-stead,
    Within their fathers' walls, amidst the peace of home, they shed
    The lives from out their bodies pierced: then some men shut the gate,
    Nor durst they open to their friends, or take in them that wait
    Praying without; and there indeed is woeful slaughter towards
    Of them that fence the wall with swords, and rushers on the swords.
    Those shut out 'neath the very eyes of weeping kith and kin,
    Some headlong down the ditches roll, by fleeing rout thrust in;
    Some blindly and with loosened rein spur on their steeds to meet
    As battering-rams the very gates, the ruthless door-leaves beat      890
    And now, in agony of fight, the mothers on the walls,
    E'en as they saw Camilla do, (so love of country calls),
    With hurrying hands the javelins cast, and in the iron's stead
    Make shift of hardened pale of oak and stake with half-burned head.
    Hot-heart they are, afire to die the first their town to save.

    Meanwhile to Turnus in the woods sweeps in that cruel wave
    Of tidings: trouble measureless doth Acca to him bring,--
    The wasting of the Volscian host, Camilla's murdering,
    The onset of the baneful foe with favouring Mars to aid;
    The ruin of all things; present fear e'en on the city laid,          900
    He, madly wroth, (for even so Jove's dreadful might deemed good),
    Leaveth the hills' beleaguerment and mirky rugged wood.
    Scarce was he out of sight thereof, and nigh his camp to win,
    When mid the opened pass and bare AEneas entereth in,
    Climbeth the ridge, and slippeth through the thicket's shadowy night.

    So either toward the city fares with all their battle-might,
    And no long space of way indeed there was betwixt the twain,
    For e'en so soon as far away AEneas saw the plain
    Through dusty reek, and saw withal Laurentum's host afar,
    Turnus the fierce AEneas knew in all array of war,                    910
    And heard the marching footmen tramp, and coming horses neigh.
    Then had they fallen to fight forthwith and tried the battle-play,
    But rosy Phoebus sank adown amidst Iberian flood
    His weary steeds, and brought back Night upon the failing day.
    So there they pitch before the town and make their ramparts good.




BOOK XII.

ARGUMENT.

HEREIN ARE AENEAS AND TURNUS PLEDGED TO FIGHT THE MATTER OUT IN SINGLE
COMBAT; BUT THE LATINS BREAK THE PEACE AND AENEAS IS WOUNDED: IN THE END
AENEAS MEETETH TURNUS INDEED, AND SLAYETH HIM.


    When Turnus sees the Latin men all failing from the sword,
    Broken by Mars, and that all folk bethink them of his word,
    And fall to mark him with their eyes, then fell he burns indeed,
    And raises up his heart aloft; e'en as in Punic mead
    The smitten lion, hurt in breast by steel from hunters' ring,
    Setteth the battle in array, and joyfully doth fling
    The mane from off his brawny neck, and fearless of his mood
    Breaks off the clinging robber-spear, and roars from mouth of blood;
    E'en so o'er Turnus' fiery heart the tide of fury wins,
    And thus he speaketh to the King, and hasty speech begins:            10

    "No hanging back in Turnus is, and no AEnean thrall
    Hath aught to do to break his word or plighted troth recall:
    I will go meet him: Father, bring the Gods, the peace-troth plight;
    Then either I this Dardan thing will send adown to night,--
    This rag of Asia,--Latin men a-looking on the play,
    And all alone the people's guilt my sword shall wipe away;
    Or let him take us beaten folk, and wed Lavinia then!"

    But unto him from quiet soul Latinus spake again:
    "Great-hearted youth, by e'en so much as thou in valorous might
    Dost more excel, by so much I must counsel me aright,                 20
    And hang all haps that may betide in those sad scales of mine.
    Thine are thy father Daunus' realms, a many towns are thine,
    Won by thine hand: Latinus too his gold and goodwill yields;
    But other high-born maids unwed dwell in Laurentine fields
    Or Latin land,--nay, suffer me to set all guile apart,
    And say a hard thing--do thou take this also to thine heart:
    To none of all her wooers of old my daughter may I wed;
    This warning word of prophecy all men and Gods have sped.
    But by thy kindred blood o'ercome, and by the love of thee,
    And by my sad wife's tears, I broke all bonds and set me free.        30
    From son-in-law I rapt his bride, I drew a godless sword.
    What mishaps and what wrack of peace have been my due reward
    Thou seest, Turnus, and what grief I was the first to bear.
    Twice beaten in a woeful fight, scarce is our city here
    Held by the hope of Italy: still Tiber-flood rolls by,
    Warm with our blood, and 'neath our bones wide meadows whitening lie.
    But whither waver I so oft? what folly shifts my mind?
    If I am ready, Turnus dead, peace with these men to bind,
    Shall I not rather while thou liv'st cast all the war away?
    What shall my kindred Rutuli, what shall Italia say,                  40
    If I deliver thee to death, (Fate thrust the words aside!)
    Thee, who hast wooed me for thy sire, my daughter for thy bride?
    Look on the wavering hap of war, pity thy father's eld,
    Now far from thee in sorrow sore by ancient Ardea held."

    But not a whit might all these words the wrath of Turnus bend.
    Nay, worser waxed he, sickening more by medicine meant to mend:
    And e'en so soon as he might speak, such words were in his mouth:
    "Thy trouble for my sake, best lord, e'en for my sake forsooth,
    Lay down, I prithee; let me buy a little praise with death.
    I too, O father, sow the spear, nor weak hand scattereth              50
    The iron seed, with me afield: the blood-springs know my stroke.
    Nor here shall be his Goddess-dame with woman's cloud to cloak
    A craven king, and hide herself in empty mirky shade."

    But now the Queen, by this new chance of battle sore afraid,
    Fell weeping, as her fiery son she held with dying eyes:
    "O Turnus, by these tears, by what of worship for me lies
    Anigh thy heart; O, only hope of this my latter tide,
    Sole rest from sorrow! thou, in whom all worship doth abide,
    All glory of the Latin name, our falling house-wall stay!
    Set not thine hand to Teucrian war; this thing alone I pray.          60
    Whatever lot abideth thee, O Turnus, mid the fight,
    Abideth me, and I with thee will leave the loathed light;
    Nor will I, made AEneas' thrall, behold him made my son."

    Lavinia heard her mother's words with burning cheeks, whereon
    Lay rain of tears, for thereunto exceeding ruddy flush
    Had brought the fire that now along her litten face did rush:
    As when the Indian ivory they wrong with blood-red dye,
    Or when mid many lilies white the ruddy roses lie,
    E'en such a mingled colour showed upon the maiden's face.
    Sore stirred by love upon the maid he fixed his constant gaze,        70
    And, all the more afire for fight, thus to Amata said:

    "I prithee, mother, with these tears, such sign of coming dread,
    Dog not my feet as forth I wend to Mavors' bitter play;
    For Turnus is not free to thrust the hour of death away.
    Go, Idmon, bear the Phrygian lord these very words of mine,
    Nought for his pleasure: When the dawn tomorrow first shall shine,
    And from her purple wheels aloft shall redden all the sky,
    Lead not thy Teucrians to the fight: Teucrians and Rutuli
    Shall let their swords be; and we twain, our blood shall quench the strife,
    And we upon that field shall woo Lavinia for a wife."                 80

    He spake, and to the roofed place now swiftly wending home,
    Called for his steeds, and merrily stood there before their foam,
    E'en those that Orithyia gave Pilumnus, gift most fair,
    Whose whiteness overpassed the snow, whose speed the winged air.
    The busy horse-boys stand about, and lay upon their breasts
    The clapping of their hollow hands, and comb their maned crests.
    But he the mail-coat doth on him well-wrought with golden scale
    And latten white; he fits the sword unto his hand's avail:
    His shield therewith, and horned helm with ruddy crest o'erlaid:
    That sword, the very Might of Fire for father Daunus made,            90
    And quenched the white-hot edge thereof amidst the Stygian flood.
    Then the strong spear he took in hand that 'gainst the pillar stood,
    Amidmost of the house: that spear his hand won mightily
    From Actor of Auruncum erst; he shakes the quivering tree
    Loud crying: "Now, O spear of mine, who never heretofore
    Hast failed my call, the day draws on: thee the huge Actor bore,
    Now Turnus' right hand wieldeth thee: to aid, that I prevail
    To lay the Phrygian gelding low, and strip his rended mail
    By might of hand; to foul with dust the ringlets of his hair,
    Becrisped with curling-irons hot and drenched with plenteous myrrh!"  100

    By such a fury is he driven; from all his countenance
    The fiery flashes leap, the flames in his fierce eyeballs dance:
    As when a bull in first of fight raiseth a fearful roar,
    And teacheth wrath unto his horns and whets them for the war,
    And 'gainst the tree-trunks pusheth them, and thrusts the breezes home,
    And with the scattering of the sand preludeth fight to come.

    Nor less AEneas, terrible, in Venus' armour dight,
    Now whetteth war; and in his heart stirreth the wrath of fight,
    That plighted peace shall lay the war fain is his heart and glad;
    His fellows' minds and bitter fear that makes Iulus sad              110
    He solaceth with fate-wise words; then bids his folk to bear
    His answer to the Latin king and peace-laws to declare.

    But scarce the morrow's dawn of day had lit the mountain steeps,
    And scarce the horses of the Sun drew upward from the deeps,
    And from their nostrils raised aloft blew forth the morning clear,
    When Trojans and Rutulian men the field of fight prepare,
    And measure out a space beneath the mighty city's wall.
    Midmost the hearths they hallow there to common Gods of all,
    And grassy altars: other some bear fire, and fountain's flow,
    All linen clad, and vervain leaves are crowning every brow.          120
    Forth comes the host of Italy, the men that wield the spear
    Pour outward from the crowded gate; the Trojan host is there,
    And all the Tyrrhene company in battle-gear diverse,
    Nor otherwise in iron clad, than if the War-god fierce
    Cried on to arms: and in the midst of war-ranks thousandfold
    The dukes are flitting, well beseen in purple dye and gold,
    E'en Mnestheus of Assaracus, Asylas huge of force,
    Messapus, Neptune's very son, the tamer of the horse.
    But when the sign was given abroad each to his own place won,
    And set his spear-shaft in the earth and leaned his shield thereon.  130
    Then streamed forth mothers fain to see and elders feeble grown;
    The unarmed crowd beset the towers and houses of the town,
    And others of the people throng the high-built gates around.

    But Juno from the steep that men now call the Alban mound
    (Though neither worship, name, nor fame it bore upon that day),
    Was looking down upon the lists and either war-array
    Of Trojan and Laurentine men, and King Latinus' wall,
    Then upon Turnus' sister's ear her words of God did fall:
    A goddess she, the queen of mere and sounding river-wave;
    Which worship Jupiter the King, the Heaven-Abider gave               140
    A hallowed gift to pay her back for ravished maidenhood:

    "O Nymph, the glory of the streams, heart well-beloved and good,
    Thee only, as thou know'st, I love of all who e'er have come
    Into the unkind bed of Jove from out a Latin home,
    With goodwill have I granted thee the heavenly house to share;
    Therefore, Juturna, know thy grief lest I the blame should bear:
    While Fortune would, and while the Fates allowed the Latin folk
    A happy day, so long did I thy town and Turnus cloak;
    But now I see him hastening on to meet the fated ill:
    His doomsday comes, the foeman's hand shall soon his hour fulfil.    150
    I may not look upon the fight, or see the wagered field;
    But thou, if any present help thou durst thy brother yield,
    Haste, it behoves thee!--happier days on wretches yet may rise."

    Scarce spake she ere Juturna poured the tear-flood from her eyes,
    And thrice and four times smote with hand her bosom well beseen.
    "Nay, this is now no weeping-time," saith that Saturnian Queen,
    "Haste; snatch thy brother from the death if all be not undone,
    Or wake up war and rend apart the treaty scarce begun;
    And I am she that bids thee dare."
                                        She urged her, and she left
    Her wavering mind and turmoiled heart with sorrow's torment cleft.   160

    Meantime the Kings--Latinus there, a world of state around,
    Is borne upon the fourfold car, his gleaming temples bound
    With twice six golden rays, the sign of his own grandsire's light,
    The heavenly Sun; and Turnus wends with twi-yoked horses white,
    Tossing in hand two shafts of war with broad-beat points of steel.
    And hither Father AEneas, spring of the Roman weal,
    Flaming with starry shield and arms wrought in the heavenly home,
    And next to him Ascanius young, the second hope of Rome,
    Fare from the camp: the priest thereon, in unstained raiment due,
    Offereth a son of bristly sow and unshorn yearling ewe,              170
    And bringeth up the four-foot hosts unto the flaming place.
    But they, with all eyes turned about the rising sun to face,
    Give forth the salt meal from the hand, and with the iron sign
    The victims' brows, and mid the flame pour out the bowls of wine:
    Then good AEneas draws his sword, and thuswise prays the prayer:
    "Bear witness, Sun, and thou, O Land, who dost my crying hear!
    Land, for whose sake I waxed in might, sustaining toils enow;
    And Thou, Almighty Father, hear! Saturnian Juno thou,
    Grown kinder, Goddess, I beseech; and thou, most glorious Mars,
    Father, whose hand of utter might is master of all wars;             180
    Ye Springs, and River-floods I call, and whatsoever God
    Is in the air, or whatso rules the blue sea with its rod--
    If to Ausonian Turnus here Fortune shall give the day,
    The conquered to Evander's town shall straightly wend their way;
    Iulus shall depart the land, nor shall AEneas' folk
    Stir war hereafter, or with sword the Latin wrath provoke.
    But if the grace of victory here bow down upon our fight;
    --(As I believe, as may the Gods make certain with their might!)--
    I will not bid the Italian men to serve the Teucrian's will;
    Nor for myself seek I the realm; but all unconquered still           190
    Let either folk with equal laws plight peace for evermore:
    The Gods and worship I will give, Latinus see to war;
    My father lawful rule shall have; for me my Teucrians here
    Shall build a city, and that home Lavinia's name shall bear."

    So first AEneas: after whom Latinus swears and says,
    Looking aloft, and stretching hands up towards the starry ways:
    "E'en so, AEneas, do I swear by Stars, and Sea, and Earth,
    By twi-faced Janus, and the twins Latona brought to birth,
    And by the nether Might of God and shrine of unmoved Dis;
    And may the Sire who halloweth in all troth-plight hearken this:     200
    I hold the altars, and these Gods and fires to witness take,
    That, as for Italy, no day the peace and troth shall break,
    What thing soever shall befall; no might shall conquer me.
    Not such as with the wrack of flood shall mingle earth and sea,
    Nor such as into nether Hell shall melt the heavenly land.
    E'en as this sceptre"--(for by chance he bore a staff in hand)--
    "Shall never more to leafage light and twig and shadow shoot,
    Since when amid the thicket-place, cut off from lowest root,
    It lost its mother, and the knife hath lopped it, leaf and bough,--
    A tree once, but the craftsman's hand hath wrapped it seemly now     210
    With brass about, and made it meet for hands of Latin lords."

    So in the sight of all the chiefs with such abundant words
    They bound the troth-plight fast and sure: then folk in due wise slay
    The victims on the altar-flame, and draw the hearts away
    Yet living, and with platters full the holy altars pile.

    But unto those Rutulian men unequal this long while
    The fight had seemed, and in their hearts the mingled trouble rose;
    And all the more, as nigher now they note the ill-matched foes,
    This helpeth Turnus' silent step, and suppliant worshipping
    About the altars, and his eyes that unto earth do cling,             220
    His faded cheeks, his youthful frame that wonted colour lacks.
    Wherefore Jaturna, when she hears the talk of people wax,
    And how the wavering hearts of men in diverse manner sway,
    Like unto Camers wendeth now amidst of that array;
    --A mighty man, from mighty blood, his father well renowned
    For valorous worth, and he himself keen in the battle found.
    So through the mid array she speeds, well knowing what is toward,
    And soweth rumour on the wind and speaketh such a word:

    "O shame ye not, Rutulian men, to offer up one soul
    For all your warriors? lack we aught in might or muster-roll         230
    To match them? Here is all they have--Trojans, Arcadian peers,
    And that Etruscan Turnus' bane, the fateful band of spears:
    Why, if we meet, each second man shall scantly find a foe.
    And now their king, upborne by fame, unto the Gods shall go,
    Upon whose shrines he vows himself; his name shall live in tale.
    But we shall lose our fatherland and 'neath proud lords shall fail,
    E'en those that sit there heavy-slow upon our fields today."

    So with such words she lit the hearts of all that young array;
    Yet more and more a murmur creeps about the ranks of men;
    Changed even are Laurentine folk; changed are the Latins then;       240
    They who had hoped that rest from fight and peaceful days were won,
    Are now but fain of battle-gear, and wish the troth undone,
    For ruth that such a cruel fate on Turnus' head should fall.
    But unto these a greater thing Jaturna adds withal,
    A sign from heaven; and nought so much stirred Italy that day,
    As this whose prodigy beguiled men's hearts to go astray:
    For now the yellow bird of Jove amid the ruddy light
    Was chasing of the river-fowl, and drave in hurried flight
    The noisy throng; when suddenly down to the waves he ran,
    And caught in greedy hooked claws a goodly-bodied swan:              250
    Uprose the hearts of Italy, for all the fowl cry out,
    And, wonderful for eyes to see, from fleeing turn about,
    Darken the air with cloud of wings, and fall upon the foe;
    Till he, oppressed by might of them and by his prey held low,
    Gives way, and casts the quarry down from out his hooked claws
    Into the river, and aback to inner cloud-land draws.

    Then to the sign the Rutuli shout greeting with one breath,
    And spread their hands abroad; but first the seer Tolumnius saith:
    "This, this is that, which still my prayers sought oft and o'er again.
    I take the sign, I know the God! to arms with me, O men!             260
    Poor people, whom the stranger-thief hath terrified with war.
    E'en like these feeble fowl; who wastes the acres of your shore,
    Yet shall he fly, and give his sails unto the outer sea:
    But ye, your ranks with heart and mind now serry manfully,
    And ward your ravished King and Duke with all your battle-world!"

    He spake, and, running forth, a shaft against the foe he hurled.
    Forth whizzed the cornel through the air, cleaving its way aright,
    And therewithal great noise outbreaks, and every wedge of fight
    Is turmoiled, and the hearts of men are kindled for the fray.
    On sped the shaft to where there stood across its baneful way        270
    Nine fair-shaped brethren, whom whilom one faithful Tuscan wife
    Amid Gylippus' Arcad house brought forth to light and life:
    Now one of these, e'en where the belt of knitted stitches wrought
    Chafed on the belly, and the clasp the joining edges caught,
    A youth most excellent of frame and clad in glittering gear--
    It pierced his ribs; on yellow sand it stretched him dying there.
    Thereat his brethren, a fierce folk, with grief and rage alight,
    Some draw their swords and some catch up the steel of speedy flight,
    And rush on blind: Laurentum's ranks, against them swift they go,
    And thick the Trojans from their side the meadows overflow,          280
    Agyllans and Arcadian men with painted war array;
    And one lust winneth over all with point and edge to play.
    They strip the altars; drifting storm of weapon-shot doth gain
    O'er all the heavens, and ever grows the iron battle-rain.

    The bowls and hearths they bear away: Latinus gets him gone,
    Bearing aback the beaten Gods and troth-plight all undone,
    But other men rein in the car and leap upon the steed,
    And there with naked swords they sit, all ready for the need.

    Messapus, fain to rend the troth, on hostile horse down-bears
    Upon Aulestes, Tuscan king, who kingly raiment wears:                290
    He fled, but as abackward there away from him he went,
    Came on the altars at his back in hapless tanglement
    Of head and shoulders: thitherward doth hot Messapus fly
    With spear in hand, and from his steed he smites him heavily
    With the great beam amid his prayers, and word withal doth say:
    "He hath it, and the Gods have got a better host today!"
    Therewith to strip his body warm up runs the Italian band;
    But Corynaeus from the hearth catches a half-burnt brand,
    And e'en as Ebusus comes up, and stroke in hand doth bear,
    He filleth all his face with flame; out doth his great beard flare,  300
    And sendeth stink of burning forth: the Trojan followed on
    The wildered man, and with his left grip of his tresses won,
    And, straining hard with weight of knee, to earth he pinned his foe,
    And drave the stark sword through his side.
                                                See Podalirius go,
    Chasing the shepherd Alsus through the front of weapon-wrack;
    O'er him he hangs with naked sword; but he, with bill swung back,
    Cleaveth the foeman facing him through midmost brow and chin,
    And all about his battle-gear the bloody rain doth win:
    Then iron slumber fell on him, hard rest weighed down his eyes,
    And shut were they for evermore in night that never dies.            310

    Then good AEneas stretched forth hands all empty of the sword,
    And called bare-headed on his folk, with eager shouted word:
    "Where rush ye on, and whither now doth creeping discord rise?
    Refrain your wrath; the troth is struck; its laws in equal wise
    Are doomed; and 'tis for me alone the battle to endure.
    Nay, let me be! cast fear away; my hand shall make it sure.
    This troth-plight, all these holy things, owe Turnus to my sword."

    But while his voice was sounding, lo, amidmost of his word,
    A whistling speedy-winged shaft unto the hero won;
    Unknown what hand hath sped it forth, what whirlwind bore it on;     320
    What God, what hap, such glory gave to hands of Rutuli;
    Beneath the weight of things unknown dead doth the honour lie,
    Nor boasted any of the hurt AEneas had that day.

    But Turnus, when he saw the King give back from that array,
    And all the turmoil of the Dukes, with hope his heart grew fain;
    He cried for horse and arms, and leapt aloft to battle-wain,
    And high of heart set on apace, the bridle in his hand;
    And many a brave man there he gave unto the deadly land,
    And rolled o'er wounded men in heaps, and high in car wore down
    The ranks of men; and fleers' spears from out his hand were thrown:
    E'en as when litten up to war by Hebrus' chilly flood                331
    Red Mavors beateth on his shield, and rouseth fightful mood
    Amid the fury of his steeds, who o'er the level lea
    In uttermost hoof-smitten Thrace the south and west outflee.
    And lo, the fellows of the God, the black Fear's bitter face,
    The Rage of men, the Guile of War anigh him wend apace:
    E'en so amid the battle-field his horses Turnus sped,
    Reeking with sweat: there tramples he the woeful heaps of dead,
    The hurrying hoofs go scattering wide a drift of bloody rain;
    The gore, all blent with sandy dust, is pounded o'er the plain.      340
    To death he casteth Sthenelus, Pholus, and Thamyris;
    Those twain anigh, but him afar; from far the bane he is
    Of Glaucus and of Lades, sons of Imbrasus, whom he
    In Lycia bred a while agone, and armed them equally
    To fight anigh, or on their steeds the winds to overrun.

    But otherwhere amidst the fight Eumedes fareth on,
    The son of Dolon of old time, most well-renowned in fight,
    And bringing back his father's name in courage and in might:
    For that was he who while agone the Danaan camp espied,
    And chose Achilles' car for spoil in his abundant pride:             350
    But otherwise Tydides paid for such a deed o'erbold,
    And no more had he any hope Achilles' steeds to hold.
    So Turnus, when adown the lea this warrior he had seen,
    First a light spear he sent in chase across the void between,
    Then stayed his steeds, and leaping down unto the fallen ran,
    And set his foot upon the neck of that scarce-breathing man,
    And from his right hand wrenched the sword and bathed its glittering blade
    Deep in his throat, and therewithal such spoken chiding said:
    "Down, Trojan! measure out the mead, and that Hesperean land
    Thou sought'st in war: such are the gifts that fall unto the hand    360
    Of those that dare the sword with me; such city-walls they raise!"

    Asbutes wends 'neath spear-cast then, a fellow of his ways;
    Chloreus, Dares, Thersilochus, and Sybaris, withal;
    Thymoetes, who from rearing horse had hap to catch a fall;
    And e'en as when the breathing forth of Thracian Boreas roars
    O'er deep AEgean, driving on the wave-press to the shores,
    Then wheresoe'er the wind stoops down the clouds flee heaven apace;
    So wheresoe'er cleaves Turnus way all battle giveth place,
    All war-array is turned to wrack: his onrush beareth him,
    And in the breeze that meets his car his tossing crest doth swim.    370

    This onset of the maddened heart nought Phegeus might abide,
    But cast himself before the steeds, and caught and wrenched aside
    The bit-befoaming mouths of them, the heart-stung hurrying steeds.
    But while he hangeth dragged along, the spear broad-headed speeds
    Unto his shieldless side, and rends the twilinked coat of mail,
    And for the razing of his flesh a little doth avail:
    But he turned round about his shield and at the foemen made,
    And from his naked sword drawn forth sought most well-needed aid;
    When now the axle-tree and wheel, unto fresh speeding won,
    Cast him down headlong unto earth, and Turnus following on,          380
    Betwixt the lowest of the helm and haubert's upper lip
    Sheared off his head, and left the trunk upon the sand to slip.

    But while victorious Turnus gives these deaths unto the plain,
    Mnestheus and that Achates leal, Ascanius with the twain,
    Bring great AEneas to the camp all covered with his blood;
    There, propping up his halting steps with spear-shaft long, he stood:
    Mad wroth he is, and strives to pluck the broken reed away,
    And bids them help by any road, the swiftest that they may,
    To cut away the wound with sword, cut to the hiding-place
    Where lies the steel, and send him back to meet the battle's face.   390
    Iapis, son of Iasus, by Phoebus best beloved,
    Draws nigh now: Phoebus on a time, by mighty longing moved,
    Was fain to give him gifts of God, his very heavenly craft--
    Foresight, or skill of harp-playing, or mastery of the shaft:
    But he, that from his bed-rid sire the death he yet might stave,
    Would liefer know the might of herbs, and how men heal and save,
    And, speeding of a silent craft, inglorious life would wear.

    AEneas, fretting bitterly, stood leaning on his spear
    Midst a great concourse of the lords, with sad Iulus by,
    Unmoved amid their many tears: the elder, girded high                400
    In folded gown, in e'en such wise as Paeon erst was dight,
    With hurrying hand speeds many a salve of Phoebus' herbs of might;
    But all in vain: his right hand woos the arrow-head in vain;
    For nought the teeth of pincers grip the iron of the bane;
    No happy road will Fortune show, no help Apollo yields:
    And grimly terror more and more prevaileth o'er the fields,
    And nigher draws the evil hour: they see the dusty pall
    Spread o'er the heaven; draw horsemen nigh, and shafts begin to fall
    Thick in the midmost of the camp: grim clamour smites the stars,
    The shouts of men, the cries of men that fall in game of Mars.       410

    Now Mother Venus, sore at heart for her sore-wounded son,
    Plucketh a stalk of dittany from Cretan Ida won,
    That with a downy leaf of grey and purple head doth grow,
    And well enough the mountain-goats the herbage of it know
    What time the winged shaft of man within them clingeth sore.
    This Venus brought, with cloudy cloak her body covered o'er,
    This in the waves of glittering rims she steepeth privily,
    Drugging the cup, and wholesome juice withal there blendeth she,
    Wrought of ambrosia; heal-all too most sweet of heavenly smell.
    So with that stream Iapis old the shaft-wound cherished well         420
    Unwitting: sudden from the flesh all grievance doth depart,
    And all the blood is staunched at once up from the wound's deep heart,
    And comes the shaft unto the hand with nought to force it forth,
    And freshly to the king returns his ancient might and worth.
    Then cries Iapis:
                      "Loiter ye? arms for the hero then!"
    And he is first against the foe to whet the hearts of men.
    "Lo, not from any help of man, nor from art's mastery
    These things have happed, nor hath mine hand, AEneas, holpen thee.
    A great God wrought to send thee back great deeds of fame to win."

    Then, fain of fight, on either side the king his legs shuts in       430
    With ruddy gold: he loathes delay, and high his war-shaft shakes;
    And then his left side meets the shield, his back the hauberk takes,
    And round Iulus casteth he a steel-clad man's embrace,
    And saith, but lightly kissing him from midst the helmet's space:

    "Child, the bare valour learn of me and very earthly toil,
    Good-hap of others; my right hand shall ward thee in the broil
    These days that are, and gain for thee exceeding great rewards;
    But thou, when ripe thine age shall grow, remember well the swords;
    Then as thine heart seeks through the past for kin to show the road,
    Well shall thy sire AEneas stir, thine uncle Hector goad."            440

    But when these words are cast abroad, huge through the gate he goes,
    Shaking in hand a mighty spear; then in arrayment close
    Antheus and Mnestheus rush to war: the camp is left behind,
    And all the host flows forth; the fields are blent with dust-cloud blind,
    And, stirred by trample of the feet, the earth's face trembleth sore.
    But Turnus from a facing mound beheld that coming war.
    The Ausonians looked, and through their hearts swift ran the chilly fear:
    And now before all other men first doth Jaturna hear,
    And know the sound, and, quaking sore, she fleeth back again.
    On comes he, hurrying on the host black o'er the open plain:         450
    As when a storm cast on the world from heaven asunder rent,
    Wendeth across the middle sea: out! how the dread is sent
    Deep to the field-folks' boding hearts:--here comes the orchards' bane,
    Here comes the acres' utter wrack, the ruin of all the plain!
    The gale that goes before its face brings tidings to the shore:
    So 'gainst the foe the Trojan Duke led on his hosts of war;
    And gathering in the wedge-array all knit them close around.

    Now hath Thymbraeus' battle-blade the huge Osiris found,
    And Mnestheus slays Archetius, Achates Epulo,
    And Gyas Ufens: yea, the seer Tolumnius lieth low,                   460
    He who was first against the foe to hurl the war-shaft out.
    The cry goes up unto the heaven; the war-tide turns about,
    Dust-cloud of flight the Rutuli raise up across the field:
    But he, the King, thinks scorn of it to smite the backs that yield;
    Nay, those that meet him foot to foot, the wielders of the spear,
    He followeth not: Turnus alone his eyes track everywhere
    Amid the dust-cloud, him alone he crieth unto fight.
    Hereby Jaturna's manly mind is shaken with affright;
    Metiscus, Turnus' charioteer, she plucketh from the rein,
    And leaveth him fallen down afar from yoking pole and wain:          470
    But she mounts up, and with her hand the waving bridle guides,
    The while Metiscus' voice, and limbs, and war-gear with her bides:
    As when amid a lordling's house there flits a swallow black,
    On skimming wings she seeks to still her noisy nestlings' lack,
    And wandering through the lofty halls but little feast doth get,
    Then soundeth through the empty porch, and round the fish-pools wet,
    So is Jaturna borne on wheels amidmost of the foe,
    And flying on in hurrying chase by everything doth go,
    Now here, now there, her brother shows all flushed with victory,
    But still refrains him from the press; far o'er the waste they fly.  480

    No less AEneas picks his way amid the winding road,
    Tracking the man, and through the rout cries ever high and loud;
    But e'en as oftentimes as he his foeman caught with eye,
    And 'gainst the flight of winged steeds his running feet would try,
    So oft the speedy wain of war Jaturna turned aside.
    Ah, what to do? In vain he went, borne on a shifting tide,
    While diverse cares to clashing ways the soul within him drave.
    But lo, Messapus, speedy-light, who chanced in hand to have
    Two light and limber shafts of tree, each with its iron head,
    Now whirling one, a shot well aimed unto the hero sped:              490
    AEnesis stayed, and gathered him behind his shielding-gear,
    And sank upon his knee; no less the eager-driven spear
    Smote on his helm, and shore away the topmost of his crest
    Then verily his wrath arose; by all that guile oppressed,
    When he beheld the steeds and car far from his battle borne,
    He bade Jove witness, and the hearths of troth-plight wronged and torn:
    He breaks at last amidst of them with Mars to help him on,
    And fearful speedeth work of death wherein he spareth none,
    And casteth every rein aside that held his anger in.

    What God shall tell me all the woe, what God the song shall win      500
    Of shifting death and Dukes undone, and all those many dead,
    By Turnus and by him of Troy about the fight-field spread?
    O Jupiter, was this thy will, that nations doomed to live
    In peace hereafter, on that day in such a broil should strive?

    Rutulian Sucro was the first that Trojan onset stayed;
    AEneas met him, and forsooth no long delay he made,
    But smote his side, and through his ribs and fencing of the breast
    Drave on his bitter naked sword where way was easiest.

    Turnus afoot met Amycus, cast down from off his horse,
    His brother, swift Diores, too: the first amidst his course          510
    The long spear smote, the sword the last; the heads of both the twain
    He hangeth up and beareth on shedding a bloody rain.

    Talon and Tanais therewith, Cethegus stout to do,
    All three at once the Trojan sped, and sad Onytes slew,
    Whom to the name of Echion Peridia's womb did yield.

    Then Turnus slew the brethren sent from Phoebus' Lycian field:
    Menates, too, of Arcady, who loathed the war in vain;
    By fruitful fishy Lerna's flood was once his life and gain,
    And unrich house, and nought he knew of mighty men's abode,
    And hired for a price of men the earth his father sowed.             520

    As when two fires, that on a while are sped from diverse ways,
    Run through the dry and tinder wood, and crackling twigs of bays;
    As when from off the mountain-tops two hurrying rivers speed,
    And foaming, roaring, as they rush, drive down to ocean's mead,
    And each one wastes his proper road; no slothfuller than these,
    AEneas, Turnus, fare afield; swell up the anger-seas
    In both their hearts; torn are their breasts that know not how to yield,
    In speeding of the wounding-craft their utter might they wield.

    Murranus, as his sires of sires and ancient name he sings,
    And boasts his blood come far adown the line of Latin kings,         530
    AEneas, with a mighty rock and whirlwind of a stone,
    O'erthrows, and stretches on the earth; the wain-wheels roll him on,
    Amid the bridle and the yoke, whom there upon the sward
    The hurrying hoofs of horses pound, remembering not their lord.

    Then Hyllus' onset, and his heart with fury all aglow,
    Doth Turnus meet; who hurls a shaft against his golden brow,
    And through the helm the war-spear flies, and in the brain is stayed.
    Thee, Cretheus, bravest of the Greeks, thine hands did nothing aid
    To snatch from Turnus.
                           Nought his Gods did their Cupencus cloak
    Against AEneas' rush of war; breast-on he met the stroke,             540
    And nought availed that hapless one the tarrying golden shield.

    Thee also, warring AEolus, did that Laurentine field
    See fallen, and cumbering the earth with body laid alow;
    Thou diest, whom the Argive hosts might never overthrow,
    Nor that Achilles' hand that wrought the Priam's realm its wrack.
    Here was thy meted mortal doom; high house 'neath Ida's back,
    High house within Lyrnessus' garth, grave in Laurentine lea.
    Now all the hosts to fight are turned, and blent in battle's sea,
    All Latin folk, all Dardan sons, Mnestheus, Serestus keen,
    Messapus tamer of the horse, Asylas fame-beseen,                     550
    The Tuscan host, Evander's men, the Arcadian wings of fight,
    Each for himself the warriors play, and strive with utter might;
    No tarrying, no rest, they strain in contest measureless.

    But now a thought his mother sent AEneas' mind to bless.
    That he should wend unto the walls, and townward turn his host,
    And blend amid destruction swift the Latin people lost.
    For he, now marking Turnus' ways through many a company,
    Hither and thither turns his eyes, and sees the city lie
    At peace amid the mighty stir, unharmed amid the fight,
    And image of a greater war set all his soul alight.                  560
    Mnestheus, Sergestus then he calls, Serestus battle-strong,
    The Dukes of war; he mounts a knoll; thither the Teucrians throng
    In serried ranks, yet lay not by the battle-spear and shield:
    So there from off the mound he speaks amidmost of the field:

    "Let none hang back from these my words, for Jove is standing by;
    Let none be dull herein because it cometh suddenly:
    Today the town, the cause of war, the king Latinus' home,
    Unless they cry them craven men, and 'neath the yoke they come,
    Will I o'erthrow; the smoking towers upon the ground will lay.
    What! must I wait till Turnus grows fain of the battle-play?         570
    And shall he, conquered, take his ease to fight me o'er and o'er?
    O fellows, this is head and well of all the wicked war.
    Haste with the torches, set we forth the troth with fire to find!"

    He spake; but all they set to work, and striving with one mind
    Knit close their ranks, and on the town a world of battle bear:
    Unlooked-for ladders are at hand, and sudden fires appear;
    While some they run unto the gates, and there the out-guards slay,
    Or hurl the spears, and with their cloud dim down the light of day.
    AEneas, in the front of men, lifts hand unto the walls,
    And in a great and mighty voice guilt on Latinus calls,              580
    And bids the Gods to witness him twice to the battle driven,
    Italians twice become his foes, and twice the treaty riven.
    But mid the turmoiled city-folk arose the bickering then,
    Some bade unbar and open gates unto the Dardan men;
    Yea, some unto the walls would drag their very king and lord;
    But some bear arms and go their ways the walls of war to ward:
    E'en as the shepherd finds the bees shut in, a fenced folk,
    In chinky pumice rock, and fills their house with bitter smoke;
    But they, all busy-fearful grown within their waxen wall,
    Run here and there and whet their wrath with mighty humming call:    590
    The black stink rolleth through their house, and with a murmuring blind
    The stony hollows moan: the reek the empty air doth find.

    Here on the weary Latins fell another stroke of fate,
    That moved the city deep adown with sorrow sore and great;
    For when the Queen from house aloft beheld the foe draw nigh,
    The walls beset, the flaming brands unto the house-roofs fly,
    And nowhere the Rutulian ranks or Turnus' warring host,
    The hapless woman deems the youth in stress of battle lost,
    And, all bewildered in her mind by these so sudden woes,
    Curses herself for head and spring whence all the evil flows;        600
    And crying many a bitter word, and mad with sorrow grown,
    She riveth with her dying hand the queenly purple gown,
    And knits the knot of loathly death from lofty beam on high.
    But when the wretched Latin wives know all this misery,
    Her daughter first, Lavinia, wastes the blossom of her hair,
    And wounds her rosy cheeks; then they that stood about her there
    Run wild about, and all the house resoundeth with their wail.
    Thence through the city flies the sound of that unhappy tale,
    And all hearts sink: Latinus goes with raiment rent and torn,
    Stunned by his wife's unhappy lot, and city lost and lorn,           610
    And scattering o'er his hoariness defilement of the dust;
    And often he upbraids himself that he took not to trust
    That Dardan lord, nor willingly had hallowed him his son.

    Meanwhile across the outer plain war-Turnus followeth on
    The last few stragglers, duller grown, and less and less his heart
    Rejoices in his hurrying steed and their victorious part.
    The air bore to him noise of men with doubtful terror blent,
    And round about his hearkening ears confused murmur sent;
    The noise of that turmoiled town, a sound of nought but woe:
    "Ah, me!" he cried, "what mighty grief stirs up the city so?         620
    Why from the walls now goeth up this cry and noise afar?"

    He spake, and, wildered, drew the rein and stayed the battle-car:
    His sister met his questioning, as she in seeming clad
    Of that Metiscus, all the rule of battle-chariot had,
    And steeds and bridle:
                           "Hereaway, O Turnus, drive we on
    The sons of Troy; where victory shows a road that may be won:
    For other hands there are, belike, the houses to defend.
    AEneas falls on Italy, and there doth battle blend;
    So let our hands give cruel death to Teucrian men this day,
    No less in tale: so shalt thou hold thine honour in the fray."       630

    But Turnus sayeth thereunto:
    "Sister, I knew thee long ago, when first by art and craft
    Thou brok'st the troth-plight, and therewith amidst the battle went;
    And now thou hidest God in vain. But whose will thee hath sent
    From high Olympus' house to bear such troubles, and so great?
    Was it to see thy brother's end and most unhappy fate?
    For what do I? What heal is left in aught that may befall?
    Mine eyes beheld Murranus die, on me I heard him call:
    No dearer man in all the world is left me for a friend:
    Woe's me I that mighty man of men a mighty death must end.           640
    Ufens is dead, unhappy too lest he our shame behold;
    E'en as I speak the Teucrians ward his arms and body cold.
    And now--the one shame wanting yet--shall I stand deedless by
    Their houses' wrack, nor let my sword cast back that Drances' lie?
    Shall I give back, and shall this land see craven Turnus fled?
    Is death, then, such a misery? O rulers of the dead,
    Be kind! since now the high God's heart is turned away from me;
    A hallowed soul I go adown, guiltless of infamy,
    Not all unworthy of the great, my sires of long ago."

    Scarce had he said when, here behold, from midmost of the foe,       650
    Comes Saces on his foaming steed, an arrow in his face,
    Who, crying prayers on Turnus' name, onrusheth to the place:
    "Turnus, in thee our last hope lies! pity thy wretched folk!
    AEneas thundereth battle there, and threateneth with his stroke
    The overthrow of tower and town, and wrack of Italy.
    The flames are flying toward the roofs; all mouths of Latins cry
    On thee; all eyes are turned to thee: yea, the king wavereth there,
    Whom shall he call his son-in-law, to whom for friendship fare.
    The Queen to wit, thy faithfullest, is dead by her own hand,
    And, fearful of the things to come, hath left the daylight land.     660
    Messapus and Atinas keen alone upbear our might
    Before the gates: round each of them are gathered hosts of fight
    Thick-thronging, and a harvest-tide that bristles with the sword;
    While here thou wendest car about the man-deserted sward."

    Bewildered then with images of diverse things he stood
    In silent stare; and in his heart upswelled a mighty flood
    Of mingled shame and maddening grief: the Furies goaded sore
    With bitter love and valour tried and known from time of yore.
    But when the cloud was shaken off and light relit his soul,
    His burning eyeballs toward the town, fierce-hearted, did he roll,  670
    And from the wheels of war looked back unto the mighty town;
    And lo, behold, a wave of flame into a tongue-shape grown
    Licked round a tower, and 'twixt its floors rolled upward unto heaven:
    A tower that he himself had reared with timbers closely driven,
    And set beneath it rolling-gear, and dight the bridges high.

    "Now, sister, now the Fates prevail! no more for tarrying try.
    Nay, let us follow where the God, where hard Fate calleth me!
    Doomed am I to AEneas' hand; doomed, howso sore it be,
    To die the death; ah, sister, now thou seest me shamed no more:
    Now let me wear the fury through ere yet my time is o'er."           680

    He spake, and from the chariot leapt adown upon the mead,
    And left his sister lone in grief amidst the foe to speed,
    Amidst the spears, and breaketh through the midmost press of fight,
    E'en as a headlong stone sweeps down from off the mountain-height,
    Torn by the wind; or drifting rain hath washed it from its hold,
    Or loosed, maybe, it slippeth down because the years grow old:
    Wild o'er the cliffs with mighty leap goes down that world of stone,
    And bounds o'er earth, and woods and herds and men-folk rolleth on
    Amidst its wrack: so Turnus through the broken battle broke
    Unto the very city-walls, where earth was all a-soak                 690
    With plenteous blood, and air beset with whistling of the shafts;
    There with his hand he maketh sign, and mighty speech he wafts:

    "Forbear, Rutulians! Latin men, withhold the points of fight!
    Whatever haps, the hap is mine; I, I alone, of right
    Should cleanse you of the broken troth, and doom of sword-edge face."

    So from the midst all men depart, and leave an empty space;
    But now the Father AEneas hath hearkened Turnus' name,
    And backward from the walls of war and those high towers he came.
    He casts away all tarrying, sets every deed aside,
    And thundering in his battle-gear rejoicing doth he stride:          700
    As Athos great, as Eryx great, great as when roaring goes
    Amid the quaking oaken woods and glory lights the snows,
    And Father Apennine uprears his head amidst the skies.
    Then Trojan and Rutulian men turn thither all their eyes,
    And all the folk of Italy, and they that hold the wall,
    And they that drive against its feet the battering engines' fall
    All men do off their armour then. Amazed Latinus stands
    To see two mighty heroes, born in such wide-sundered lands,
    Meet thus to try what deed of doom in meeting swords may be.

    But they, when empty space is cleared amid the open lea,             710
    Set each on each in speedy wise, and with their war-spears hurled
    Amid the clash of shield and brass break into Mavors' world;
    Then groaneth earth; then comes the hail of sword-strokes thick and fast,
    And in one blended tangle now are luck and valour cast:
    As when on mighty Sila's side, or on Taburnus height,
    Two bulls with pushing horny brows are mingled in the fight:
    The frighted herdsmen draw aback, and all the beasts are dumb
    For utter fear; the heifers too misdoubt them what shall come,
    Who shall be master of the grove and leader of the flock;
    But each on each they mingle wounds with fearful might of shock,     720
    And gore and push home fencing horns, and with abundant blood
    Bathe neck and shoulder, till the noise goes bellowing through the wood;
    E'en so AEneas out of Troy, and he, the Daunian man,
    Smite shield on shield; and mighty clash through all the heavens there ran.
    'Tis Jupiter who holds the scales 'twixt even-poised tongue;
    There in the balance needfully their sundered fates he hung,
    Which one the battle-pain shall doom, in which the death shall lie.

    Now Turnus deems him safe, and forth with sword upreared on high,
    He springs, and all his body strains, and rises to the stroke,
    And smites: the Trojans cry aloud, and eager Latin folk,             730
    And both hosts hang 'twixt hope and fear: but lo, the treacherous sword
    Breaks in the middle of the blow and leaves its fiery lord:--
    And if the flight shall fail him now!--Swift as the East he flees
    When in his right hand weaponless an unknown hilt he sees.

    They say, that when all eager-hot he clomb his yoked car
    In first of fight, that then he left his father's blade of war,
    And caught in hand his charioteer Metiscus' battle-glaive;
    And that was well while Trojan fleers backs to the smiting gave,
    But when they meet Vulcanian arms, the very God's device,
    Then shivereth all the mortal blade e'en as the foolish ice;         740
    And there upon the yellow sand the glittering splinters lie.

    So diversely about the field doth wildered Turnus fly,
    And here and there in winding ways he doubleth up and down,
    For thick all round about the lists was drawn the Teucrian crown:
    By wide marsh here, by high walls there, his fleeing was begirt.

    Nor less AEneas, howsoe'er, hampered by arrow-hurt,
    His knees might hinder him at whiles and fail him as he ran,
    Yet foot for foot all eagerly followed the hurrying man;
    As when a hound hath caught a hart hemmed by the river's ring,
    Or hedged about by empty fear of crimson-feathered string,           750
    And swift of foot and baying loud goes following up the flight;
    But he, all fearful of the snare and of the flood-bank's height,
    Doubles and turns a thousand ways, while open-mouthed and staunch
    The Umbrian keen sticks hard at heel, and now, now hath his haunch,
    Snapping his jaws as though he gripped, and, mocked, but biteth air.
    Then verily the cry arose; the bank, the spreading mere,
    Rang back about, and tumult huge ran shattering through the sky.
    But Turnus as he fled cried out on all his Rutuli,
    And, calling each man by his name, craved his familiar blade.
    Meanwhile AEneas threateneth death if any come to aid,                760
    And swift destruction: and their souls with fearful threats doth fill
    Of city ruined root and branch; and, halting, followeth still.
    Five rings of flight their running fills, and back the like they wend:
    Nought light nor gamesome is the prize for which their feet contend,
    For there they strive in running-game for Turnus' life and blood.

    By hap hard by an olive wild of bitter leaves there stood,
    Hallowed to Faunus, while agone a most well-worshipped tree,
    Whereon to that Laurentian God the sailors saved from sea
    Would set their gifts, and hang therefrom their garments vowed at need.
    But now the Teucrian men of late had lopped with little heed         770
    That holy stem, that they might make the lists of battle clear:
    And there AEneas' war-spear stood; his might had driven it there,
    And held it now, set hard and fast in stubborn root and stout:
    The Dardan son bent o'er it now to pluck the weapon out,
    That he might follow him with shot whom running might not take.
    But Turnus, wildered with his fear, cried out aloud and spake:

    "O Faunus, pity me, I pray! and thou, O kindest Earth,
    Hold thou the steel for me, who still have worshipped well thy worth,
    Which ever those AEnean folk with battle would profane!"

    He spake, and called the God to aid with vows not made in vain;      780
    For o'er the tough tree tarrying long, struggling with utter might,
    No whit AEneas could undo the gripping woody bite.
    But while he struggleth hot and hard, and hangeth o'er the spear,
    Again the Daunian Goddess, clad in shape of charioteer
    Metiscus, Turnus' trusty sword unto his hand doth speed.
    But Venus, wrathful that the Nymph might dare so bold a deed,
    Came nigh, and from the deep-set root the shaft of battle drew.
    So they, high-hearted, stored with hope and battle-gear anew,
    One trusting in his sword, and one fierce with his spear on high,
    Stand face to face, the glorious game of panting Mars to try.        790

    Meanwhile the King of Heaven the great thus unto Juno saith,
    As from a ruddy cloud she looked upon the game of death:
    "What then shall end it, O my wife? what deed is left thine hand?
    That Heaven shall gain AEneas yet, a Godhead of the land,
    That Fate shall bear him to the stars thou know'st and hast allowed:
    What dost thou then, or hoping what hang'st thou in chilly cloud?
    What! was it right that mortal wound a God's own flesh should wrong?
    Right to give Turnus--but for thee how was Juturna strong?--
    The sword he lost? or vanquished men, to give their might increase?
    I prithee yield unto my prayers, and from thy troubling cease.       800
    Let not thine hushed grief eat thine heart, or bitter words of care
    So often from thy sweetest mouth the soul within me wear.
    The goal is reached: thou hast availed o'er earth and sea to drive
    The Trojan men; to strike the spark of wicked war alive;
    To foul their house, and woe and grief mid wedding-feast to bear,
    And now I bid thee hold thine hand."
                                        Thuswise said Jupiter,
    And with a downcast countenance spake that Satumian Queen:
    "Well have I known, great Jupiter, all that thy will hath been,
    And Turnus and the worldly land loth have I left alone,
    Else nowise should'st thou see me bear, sole on this airy throne,    810
    Things meet and unmeet: flame-begirt the war-ranks would I gain,
    And drag the host of Trojans on to battle and their bane.
    Juturna!--yes, I pitied her, and bade her help to bear
    Unto her brother; good, methought, for life great things to dare;
    But nought I bade her to the shaft or bending of the bow,
    This swear I by the ruthless well, the Stygian overflow,
    The only holy thing there is that weighs on Godhead's oath.
    And now indeed I yield the place, and leave the fight I loathe.
    But one thing yet I ask of thee, held in no fateful yoke;
    For Latium's sake I pray therefore, and glory of thy folk:           820
    When they at last--so be it now!--pledge peace mid bridal kind,
    When they at last join law to law, and loving treaty bind,
    Let them not change their ancient name, those earth-born Latin men,
    Nor turn them into Trojan folk, or call them Teucrians then:
    Let not that manfolk shift their tongue, or cast their garb aside;
    Let Latium and the Alban kings through many an age abide,
    And cherish thou the Roman stem with worth of Italy:
    Troy-town is dead: Troy and its name for ever let them die!"

    The Fashioner of men and things spake, smiling in her face:
    "Yea, Jove's own sister; second branch forsooth, of Saturn's race!   830
    Such are the mighty floods of wrath thou rollest in thy breast.
    But this thine anger born for nought, I prithee let it rest:
    I give thine asking; conquered now I yield me, and am glad:
    The Ausonian men shall keep the tongue and ways their fathers had,
    And as their name is shall it be: only in body blent
    Amidst them shall the Teucrians sink; from me shall rites be sent,
    And holy things, and they shall be all Latins of one tongue.
    Hence shalt thou see a blended race from blood Ausonian sprung,
    Whose godliness shall outgo men, outgo the Gods above;
    Nor any folk of all the world so well thy worth shall love." 840

    So gladdened Juno's heart was turned, and yea-saying she bowed,
    And so departed from the sky and left her watching-cloud.

    Another thing the Father now within him turneth o'er,
    What wise Juturna he shall part from her lost brother's war:
    Two horrors are there that are called the Dreadful Ones by name,
    Whom with Megaera of the Pit at one birth and the same
    Untimely Night brought forth of yore, and round about them twined
    Like coils of serpents, giving them great wings to hold the wind:
    About Jove's throne, and close anigh the Stern King's threshold-stead,
    Do these attend, in sick-heart men to whet the mortal dread,         850
    Whenso the King-God fashions forth fell death and dire disease,
    Or smites the guilty cities doomed with battle miseries.
    Now one of these sent Jupiter swift from the heavenly place,
    And bade her for a sign of doom to cross Juturna's face.
    So borne upon a whirl of wind to earth the swift one flies,
    E'en as an arrow from the string is driven amid the skies,
    Which headed with the venom fell a Parthian man hath shot,--
    Parthian, Cydonian, it may be,--the hurt that healeth not;
    Its hidden whirring sweepeth through the drifting misty flow:
    So fared the Daughter of the Night, and sought the earth below.      860

    But when she saw the Ilian hosts and Turnus' battle-rank,
    Then sudden into puny shape her body huge she shrank,
    A fowl that sits on sepulchres, and desert roofs alone
    In the dead night, and through the mirk singeth her ceaseless moan;
    In such a shape this bane of men met Turnus' face in field,
    And, screeching, hovered to and fro, and flapped upon his shield:
    Strange heaviness his body seized, consuming him with dread,
    His hair stood up, and in his jaws his voice lay hushed and dead.

    But when afar Juturna knew the Dread One's whirring wings,
    The hapless sister tears her hair and loose its tresses flings,      870
    Fouling her face with tearing nails, her breast with beat of hand.

    "How may my help, O Turnus, now beside my brother stand?
    How may I harden me 'gainst this? by what craft shall I stay
    Thy light of life? how cast myself in such a monster's way?
    Now, now I leave the battle-field; fright not the filled with fear,
    O birds of ill! full well I know your flapping wings in air,
    And baneful sound. Thy mastering will I know it holdeth good,
    O Jove the great!--was this the gift thou gav'st for maidenhood?
    Why give me everlasting life, and death-doom take away?
    O, but for that my sorrows sore now surely might I slay,             880
    And wend beside my brother now amid the nether Night.
    Am I undying? ah, can aught of all my good delight
    Without thee, O my brother lost! O Earth, gape wide and well,
    And let a Goddess sink adown into the deeps of hell!"

    So much she said, and wrapped her round with mantle dusky-grey,
    And, groaning sore, she hid herself within the watery way.

    But forth AEneas goes, and high his spear he brandisheth,
    A mighty tree, and from his heart grown fell a word he saith:
    "And wherewith wilt thou tarry me? hangs Turnus back again?
    No foot-strife but the armed hand must doom betwixt us twain.        890
    Yea, turn thyself to every shape, and, gathering everything
    Wherewith thine heart, thy craft is strong, go soaring on the wing,
    And chase the stars; or deep adown in hollow earth lie stored."

    But Turnus shakes his head and saith: "'Tis not thy bitter word
    That frights me, fierce one; but the Gods, but Jove my foeman grown."

    No more he said, but, looking round, espied a weighty stone,
    An ancient mighty rock indeed, that lay upon the lea,
    Set for a landmark, judge and end of acre-strife to be,
    Which scarce twice six of chosen men upon their backs might raise,
    Of bodies such as earth brings forth amid the latter days:           900
    But this in hurrying hand he caught, and rising to the cast,
    He hurled it forth against the foe, and followed on it fast;
    Yet while he raised the mighty stone, and flung it to its fall.
    Knew nought that he was running there, or that he moved at all:
    Totter his knees, his chilly blood freezes with deadly frost,
    And e'en the hero-gathered stone, through desert distance tossed,
    O'ercame not all the space betwixt, nor home its blow might bring:
    E'en as in dreaming-tide of night, when sleep, the heavy thing,
    Weighs on the eyes, and all for nought we seem so helpless-fain
    Of eager speed, and faint and fail amidmost of the strain;           910
    The tongue avails not; all our limbs of their familiar skill
    Are cheated; neither voice nor words may follow from our will:
    So Turnus, by whatever might he strives to win a way,
    The Dread One bans his hope; strange thoughts about his heart-strings play;
    He stareth on his Rutuli, and on the Latin town
    Lingering for dread, trembling to meet the spear this instant thrown:
    No road he hath to flee, no might against the foe to bear;
    Nowhither may he see his car, or sister charioteer.

    AEneas, as he lingereth there, shaketh the fateful shaft,
    And, following up its fate with eyes, afar the steel doth waft       920
    With all the might his body hath: no stone the wall-sling bears
    E'er roars so loud: no thunderclap with such a crashing tears
    Amid the heaven: on flew the spear, huge as the whirlwind black,
    And speeding on the dreadful death: it brings to utter wrack
    The hauberk's skirt and outer rim of that seven-folded shield,
    And goeth grating through the thigh: then falleth unto field
    Huge Turnus, with his hampered knee twi-folded with the wound:
    Then with a groan the Rutuli rise up, and all around
    Roar back the hill-sides, and afar the groves cast back the cry:
    But he, downcast and suppliant saith, with praying hand and eye:     930

    "Due doom it is; I pray no ruth; use what hath chanced to fall.
    Yet, if a wretched father's woe may touch thine heart at all,
    I pray thee--since Anchises once was even such to thee,--
    Pity my father Daunus' eld, and send me, or, maybe,
    My body stripped of light and life, back to my kin and land.
    Thou, thou hast conquered: Italy has seen my craven hand
    Stretched forth to pray a grace of thee; Lavinia is thy wife:
    Strain not thine hatred further now!"
                                          Fierce in the gear of strife
    AEneas stood with rolling eyes, and held back hand and sword,         939
    And more and more his wavering heart was softening 'neath the word--
    When lo, upon the shoulder showed that hapless thong of war!
    Lo, glittering with familiar boss the belt child Pallas bore,
    Whom Turnus with a wound overcame and laid on earth alow,
    And on his body bore thenceforth those ensigns of his foe.

    But he, when he awhile had glared upon that spoil of fight,
    That monument of bitter grief, with utter wrath alight,
    Cried terrible:
                    "And shalt thou, clad in my beloved one's prey,
    Be snatched from me?--Tis Pallas yet, 'tis Pallas thus doth slay,
    And taketh of thy guilty blood atonement for his death!"

    Deep in that breast he driveth sword e'en as the word he saith:      950
    But Turnus,--waxen cold and spent, the body of him lies,
    And with a groan through dusk and dark the scornful spirit flies.


THE END.



    Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co.
    Edinburgh & London





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The AEneids of Virgil, by Virgil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AENEIDS OF VIRGIL ***

***** This file should be named 29358.txt or 29358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/5/29358/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
eThe Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume 61,
No. 375, January-June, 1847, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume 61, No. 375, January-June, 1847

Author: Various

Release Date: October 18, 2018 [EBook #58129]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH MAGAZINE, JAN-JUNE 1847 ***




Produced by Brendan OConnor, Jonathan Ingram, Wayne Hammond
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)









  BLACKWOODS

  Edinburgh

  MAGAZINE.

  VOL. LXI.

  JANUARY-JUNE, 1847.

  [Illustration]

  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, EDINBURGH;

  AND

  37, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

  1847.




  BLACKWOODS

  EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.

  NO. CCCLXXV.    JANUARY, 1847.    VOL. LXI.




CONTENTS.

  THE COURT OF LOUIS PHILIPPE,                                     1

  MILDRED; A TALE. Chaps. IV., V., VI.,                           18

  EUGENE, MARLBOROUGH, FREDERICK, NAPOLEON, AND WELLINGTON,       34

  LAYS AND LEGENDS OF THE THAMES,                                 49

  PRUSSIAN MILITARY MEMOIRS,                                      65

  LAPPENBERGS ANGLO-SAXONS,                                      79

  SCOTTISH MELODIES, BY DELTA,                                    91

  GENERAL MACK--A CHRISTMAS CAROL,                                92

  REFLECTIONS SUGGESTED BY THE CAREER OF THE LATE PREMIER,        93

       *       *       *       *       *

  EDINBURGH:
  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, 45, GEORGE STREET;
  AND 37, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

  _To whom all Communications (post paid) must be addressed._

  SOLD BY ALL THE BOOKSELLERS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.

         *       *       *       *       *

  PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH.




BLACKWOODS

EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.

  No. CCCLXXV.      JANUARY, 1847.        VOL. LXI.




THE COURT OF LOUIS PHILIPPE.[1]


The schoolboy, agape at the tinsel splendour and seeming miracles of a
holiday pantomime, longs for a peep behind the pasteboard parapets that
limit his view. When the falling curtain puts a period to Clowns
malicious buffoonery and to the blunders of persecuted and long
suffering Pantaloon, he marvels as to the subsequent proceedings of the
lithe and agile mimes who have so gloriously diverted him. He is tempted
to believe that Harlequin sleeps in his motley skin, that Columbine
perpetually retains her graceful rose-wreaths and diaphanous muslin. He
can hardly realize the relapse of such glittering apparitions into the
prosaic humdrum of every-day life, and would gladly penetrate the veil
of baize that shrouds from his eager eyes the mirth-provoking crew.
Better that he should not. Sadly would his bright illusions fade, sore
be his disenchantment, could he recognise the brilliant Harlequin in yon
shabby-genteel gentleman issuing from the stage door, and discern her of
the twinkling feet rewarding herself with a measure of Barclay for the
pirouettes and entrechats that lately ravished his youthful vision.

Not unlike the boys desire for a peep behind the scenes, is the popular
hankering after glimpses of royal privacy. The concealed is ever the
coveted, the forbidden the most desired. Keep an ape under triple lock,
and fancy converts her into a sylph; it was the small key, the last of
the bunch, that Bluebeards bride most longed to use. For the multitude,
the Chronicles of Courts have ever a strong and peculiar attraction.
With what avidity is swallowed each trivial detail concerning princes
and their companions; how anxious are the humble many to obtain an
inkling of the every-day life of the great and privileged few, to dive
into the recesses of palaces, and contemplate in the relaxation of the
domestic circle, those who in public are environed by an imposing
barrier of ceremony, pomp, and dignity. In the absence of more precise
and pungent particulars, even the bald and fulsome paragraphs of a court
circular find eager readers, who learn with strange interest the
direction and extent of a kings afternoon ride, and the exact hour at
which some infant principule was borne abroad for an airing. Less meagre
and more satisfactory nourishment is afforded to popular inquisitiveness
by the writings of those who have lived in the intimacy of courts.
Seldom, however, do such appear during the lifetime both of the writer
and of the personages to whom they chiefly refer, and when they do they
are often valueless, further than as a sop to public curiosity. Truth is
rarely told of kings by those who enjoy, seek, or hope aught from their
favour. These split upon the reefs of flattery, as a disgraced courtier
does upon those of spite and disappointed ambition. And again, history
affords us examples of men, who, having, through misconduct or
misfortune, lost the countenance of their sovereign, resorted, to regain
his good graces, to shameless adulation and servile panegyric.

We do not include in any of the three categories just named, the author
of the book before us. We should not be justified in attributing to
interested motives his praises of his former patrons; but believe, on
the contrary, that, although familiar with courts, he is no mere
courtier. Had he been more of one, his fortunes might now be better.
From a very early age, Monsieur Appert devoted himself to the
prosecution of philanthropic plans and researches, having for their
chief objects the amelioration of the condition of the lower classes,
the reform of convicts, the education of the army, and that of children
who, by the desertion or vices of their parents, are left destitute and
unprotected. He has frequently been employed by the French government,
and has occupied various important posts. When only one-and-twenty, he
was appointed director of a model-school for the army. With reference to
his humane schemes, he has published many volumes on the education of
soldiers and orphans, on the prisons, schools, and other correctional
and benevolent institutions of France. With these we have nothing to do.
His present book is of a lighter and more generally interesting
character. For ten years he held the office of almoner to the Queen of
the French, and to her sister-in-law, Madame Adelaide. The charities of
these royal ladies are, as we shall presently show, on a truly princely
scale. To this almonership no salary was attached; M. Appert performed
its arduous duties gratuitously, and esteemed himself well rewarded by
the confidence and good opinion of the illustrious persons he served.
His income from other sources was ample; his position honourable, and
even distinguished; his friends, true or false, were reckoned by
hundreds. But misfortune, swift of foot, overtook him in the zenith of
his prosperity. Heavy pecuniary losses, chiefly resulting, as he implies
rather than informs us, from ill-advised loans and generous assistance
to unworthy persons, impaired his means. Concerning his disgrace at
court, he is more explicit. He attributes it to the envy and intrigues
of courtiers, against whom, as a class, he bitterly inveighs. That his
office was one well calculated to make him enemies, if he
conscientiously fulfilled its duties, is made evident by various
passages in his book. During ten years that he was in the daily habit of
seeing them, and of distributing the greater portion of their charities,
the queen and Madame Adelaide, he tells us, never made him the slightest
reproach; but, on the contrary, invariably approved his proposals and
requests, none of which, he adds, tended to his personal advantage. The
king, on various important occasions, showed great confidence in him,
and a strong sympathy with his philanthropic labours. Nevertheless, the
occult, but strong and persevering influence employed against M. Appert,
at last prevailed, and he was removed from the court, laden with costly
presents from the royal family, who assured him that they would never
forget, but always acknowledge, his long and devoted services. After his
disgrace, he sold a villa he possessed at Neuilly, and left Paris, with
the intention of founding an experimental colony of released convicts,
and of the children of criminals. Whether this experiment was carried
out, and how far it succeeded, he does not inform us. He is now
travelling in Germany, visiting the schools, prisons, and military
institutions, and writing books concerning them. The King of Prussia has
received him favourably, and given him every encouragement; the
sovereigns of Belgium, Denmark, Bavaria, Saxony, and Wurtemberg, have
written him flattering letters, and promised him all facilities and
assistance during the stay he proposes making in their respective
dominions.

It was at Berlin, in the spring of the present year, that M. Appert
completed, after very brief labour, his three volumes of Memoirs. He
confesses that they were written in haste, and whilst his mind was
preoccupied with the objects of his German tour. This is to be
regretted, for the result proves that the work was too quickly done to
be well done. The motive of his precipitation is unexplained, and we are
not told why it was necessary to complete, by the 15th of March, a book
destined to appear but in late autumn. Did the _snail-wagen_ pace of the
German _buchdruckerei_ need half a year for the printing of a thousand
pages? Surely not; and surely M. Appert might have given himself a
little more time,--have indulged us with more detail,--have produced,
instead of a hasty outline, a finished picture. His materials were
ample, his subject most interesting; he is no novice in the craft of
authorship. Besides his opportunities of observation at court, he has
enjoyed the acquaintance, in many cases the intimacy, of a vast number
of notable persons, military, diplomatic, scientific, literary.
Ministers and deputies, peers of France and nobles of the old regime,
generals of the empire and distinguished foreigners, were reckoned upon
his list of friends; many of them were regular partakers of his
periodical dinners at his Paris hotel and his Neuilly villa. It was in
his power, we are convinced, to have produced a first-rate book of its
class, instead of these hasty and unsatisfactory sketches. Each night,
he tells us, especially since the year 1826, when he was first attached
to the Orleans family, he wrote down, before retiring to rest, the
events of the day. And yet such is his haste to huddle over his work
that he cannot wait to receive his voluminous memoranda and
correspondence, but trusts entirely to his memory. As far as it goes,
this serves him pretty well. Whilst correcting the last page of these
_souvenirs_, I have received the enormous mass of notes and autograph
letters which ought to have been of great utility in the composition of
the book; and, on referring to the various documents, I am surprised to
find that my memory has served me faithfully upon every subject of
interest, and that I have nothing to rectify in what I have written.
Nothing, perhaps, to rectify, but much, we should think, to add.
Monsieur Apperts notes, judging from one or two verbatim specimens,
were both copious and minute, and must include very many interesting
particulars and anecdotes of the remarkable persons with whom he came in
contact during the varied phases of a busy and bustling life. Could he
not, without indelicacy or breach of confidence, have given us more of
such particulars? His memoirs would have gained in value had he deferred
their publication some ten or fifteen years; for then many now living
would have disappeared from the scene, and he might have spoken freely
of things and persons concerning whom he now deems it prudent or proper
to be silent. But personal recollections of the present French court,
even when loosely and imperfectly set down, cannot fail to command
attention and excite interest. And much that is novel and curious may be
culled from M. Apperts pages, although we regret, as we peruse them,
that they should have suffered from too great haste and an overstrained
discretion.

M. Appert opens his memoirs in the year 1807, in the prosperous days of
Napoleon, whose ardent admirer he is. The earlier chapters of his book,
relating to the Empire and the Restoration, have less to recommend them
than the later ones, and we shall pass them rapidly over. At the age of
fifteen he became a pupil of the imperial school of drawing. Here he
carried off the first prizes, was made sub-professor, and hopes were
held out to him that he should take a share in the education of the King
of Rome. But this was in 1812; the decline of the empire had begun,
Russia had given the first blow to Napoleons seemingly resistless
power;--the hopes of the young professor were never realized. Upon the
return of the Bourbons, after Waterloo, he lost his sub-professorship,
on account of his well-known Bonapartism; and because, whilst giving a
lesson in mathematics, he employed, to mark the curves and angles of a
geometrical figure, letters which made up the words _vive lEmpereur!_
Soon afterwards, however, he again obtained occupation, although of a
far humbler description than that to which he had once aspired. He was
employed in the organization of elementary and military schools, upon
the plan of mutual instruction. In this he was most successful, and his
reports to the Minister of war proved that, in three years, one hundred
thousand men might be taught to read, write, and cipher, at the small
expense of three hundred thousand francs, or half-a-crown per man. In
1820, although then only twenty-three years old, he was intrusted with
the inspection of the regimental schools of the royal guard and first
military division; and his connexion with the army brought him
acquainted with many of the Bonapartist plots at that time rife.
Although often confided in by the conspirators, who were aware of his
attachment to the Emperor, he took share in none of their abortive
schemes for placing Napoleon the Second on the throne of France; but,
nevertheless, he was looked upon with suspicion by the government of the
Bourbons. Still, however, he was permitted to become the director,
without a salary, of a school established in the prison at Montaigu,
appropriated to military criminals. To this prison, in the year 1822,
were sent two non-commissioned officers, by name Mathieu and Conderc,
implicated in the conspiracy for which General Berton lost his head.
Yielding to his sympathies and to the prayers of these two young men,
who were bent upon escape or suicide, M. Appert promised to assist their
flight. He did so, successfully, and the consequence was his own
imprisonment at La Force, where he was placed in the room subsequently
occupied by the poet Beranger. Pending his trial, he had for servant a
celebrated thief of the name of Dor, of whom Vidocq, the thief-taker,
more than once makes mention in his curious books. This Dor, who, for a
robber, was a very decent fellow, and who served M. Appert with the
greatest punctuality and fidelity, once had the audacity, alone and
unassisted, save by his own ingenuity, to stop a diligence full of
passengers. With a skill that would have made him an invaluable
confederate for a London or Paris _kite-flyer_, he constructed several
excellent men of straw, the size of life, and quite as natural--at least
in the dark. These he invested with the needful toggery--neither fresh
nor fashionable, we presume, but serving the purpose. Finally, he
fastened sticks, intended to represent muskets, to the shoulders of the
figures, which he posted in a row against trees bordering the high road.
Up came the diligence. Halt! shouted Dor, in the voice of a Stentor;
Halt! or my men fire! The frightened driver pulled up short; conductor
and passengers, seeing a row of figures with levelled fire-arms, thought
they had fallen into the power of a whole army of banditti, and begged
for mercy. Dor came forward in the character of a generous protector,
sternly ordered his men to abstain from violence and remain where they
were, and collected from the trembling and intimidated passengers their
purses, watches, and jewels. I forbid you to fire, he shouted to his
quaker gang, whilst pocketing the rich tribute; they make no
resistance; I will have no useless blood-shed. The conductor, delighted
to save a large sum of money secreted in a chest, quietly submitted: the
passengers were too happy to get off with whole skins, and the women
thanked the spoiler, called him a humane man, and almost kissed him, out
of gratitude for him sparing their lives. The plunder collected, the
driver received permission to continue his journey, which he did at full
speed, lest the banditti should change their minds and forget their
forbearance. Dor made his escape unmolested, leaving his straw regiment
on picket by the road side, a scarecrow, till daybreak, to the passing
traveller.

The few persons acquainted with M. Apperts share in the escape of
Mathieu and Conderc, proved stanch upon his trial: nothing could be
proved against him, and he was acquitted. The affair gave rise to long
and bitter controversy between the Liberal and Royalist newspapers. Of
course M. Appert lost his place under government, and he now had full
leisure to busy himself with his philanthropic investigations. To these
he devoted his time; but the police looked upon him as a dangerous
character, and, in May, 1823, orders were again issued for his arrest.
Forewarned, he escaped by the garden-gate at the very moment that his
pursuers knocked at the front door. The cause for which he was
persecuted, that of Bonapartism and liberal opinions--the anti-Bourbon
cause, in short--made him many friends, and he had no difficulty in
concealing himself, although prudence compelled him frequently to change
his hiding-place. One of his first retreats was the house of Lafayette,
then looked upon as an arch conspirator, and closely watched by the
police, but who, nevertheless, afforded a willing shelter to young
Appert. A happy week was passed by the latter in the hotel and constant
society of the venerable general.

I had his coachmans room, and a livery in readiness to put on, in case
of an intrusion on the part of the police. I dined with him
_tte-a-tte_, and we spent the evenings together; the porter telling
all visiters, excepting relatives and intimate friends, that the general
was at his country house of La Grange.

Monsieur de Lafayettes conversation was most interesting, his language
well chosen, his narrative style simple and charming; his character was
gay and amiable, his physiognomy respectable and good. His tone, and
every thing about him, indicated good humour, kindness, and dignity, and
the habit of the best society. He had the exquisitely polished manners
of the old regime, blent with those of the highest classes of the
present day. His vast information, the numerous anecdotes of his
well-filled life, his immense acquaintance with almost all the
celebrated persons in the world, his many and curious voyages, the great
events in which he had borne a leading part, the historical details that
he alone could give on events not yet written down in history,
constituted an inexhaustible conversational treasure, and I look upon it
as one of the happiest circumstances of my life to have passed a week in
the intimacy of that excellent and noble general.

All, however, that M. Appert thinks proper to record in print of these
anecdotes, historical details, &c., consists of a short conversation
with M. Lafayette, who predicted the final downfall of the Bourbons, and
the advent of a more liberal order of things. In 1828, many besides
Lafayette were ready with the same prophecy. M. Appert then asked the
general whether, in the event of a revolution, the Duke of Orleans, who
appeared sincerely liberal, who encouraged the progress of art and
science, sent his sons to the public colleges, cultivated the opposition
members, and was generally popular with the advocates of the progress,
might not become King of France.

My dear Appert, replied the general, what you say is very true, and
I myself greatly esteem the Duke of Orleans. I believe him sincere in
his patriotism, his children are very interesting, his wife is the best
of women. But one can answer for nothing in times of revolution.
Nevertheless, the Duke would have many chances in his favour; and for my
part, were I consulted, I should certainly vote for him.

Seven years after this curious conversation, which I wrote down at the
time, General Lafayette still entertained, and expressed at the Hotel de
Ville, the same opinion of the Duke of Orleans, now King of the French.

From Lafayette, M. Appert transferred himself to the Duchess of
Montebello, the ex-lady of honour and confidential friend of the Empress
Maria Louisa. In her hotel he abode a month, and then went into the
country. After a while, the police, who, by not capturing him, had shown
great negligence or impotence, discontinued their persecutions, and he
was again able to appear in public.

To arrive the sooner at the reign of Louis Philippe, M. Appert does
little more than briefly recapitulate the principal events of the last
few years of the Restoration, introducing, however, here and there, a
remark or anecdote not unworthy of note. Take the following, as a
Frenchmans opinion of the military promenade of 1823, and of its
leader, the Duke dAngoulme.

The battles were unimportant, our troops showed themselves brave as
ever; but, in order to flatter the prince, so much fuss was made about
the military feats of this campaign, about the passage of a bridge, for
instance, that all sensible men in France and throughout Europe,
laughed to hear so much noise for such small conquests. At last the Duke
of Angoulme returned to Paris; entertainments were given him, triumphal
arches erected, Louis XVIII. and the Count dArtois told him he was the
greatest captain of the age; the old generals of the empire, now become
courtiers and flatterers, added the incense of their praise to the royal
commendations. The poor prince came to believe that he really was a
great warrior. A lie, by dint of repetition, acquires the semblance of a
truth, especially when it flatters our self-love, our vanity and pride.
Behold, then, Louis Antoine, _Fils de France_, a greater captain than
Bayard or Turenne. Napoleon I do not name; of him the Restoration had
made _a Corsican marquis, who had had the honour to serve, with some
distinction and bravery, in the French army under the orders of the
princes, during the reign H.M. Louis XVIII., King of France and
Navarre_.

Before his departure for this famous war, the Duke of Angoulmes
disposition was simple, modest, and good; when he returned he was
subject to absence of mind and to fits of passion, and his understanding
appeared weakened. Exaggerated praise, like a dizzy height, often turns
the head.

Louis XVIII., long a sufferer from the gout, at last died, and MONSIEUR
became king under the title of Charles X. The priests and
ultra-royalists rejoiced; they thought their kingdom was come.

In another place we find a description of the personal appearance of the
valiant commander, who, duly dry-nursed and tutored by his
major-general, Count Guilleminot, won imperishable laurels in the great
fight of the Trocadero. Short in stature, and red in the face, his look
was absent, his gait and shape were ungraceful, his legs short and
thin. M. Appert describes a visit paid by the duke, then dauphin, to
his cousins at the Palais Royal. This visit, a rare favour, lasted
about twenty minutes, and when the Duchess of Orleans, according to
established etiquette, had replaced the dauphines cloak, the duke and
duchess conducted their illustrious visiters to the first step of the
grand staircase. Here the dauphin had a fit of absence, for, instead of
saying adieu, he repeated several times word of honour, word of
honour. The dauphine took hold of his arm and they returned to their
carriage. This absent man is next shown to us in a very unprincely and
unbecoming passion, for which, however, he received a proper wigging
from his royal dad. The anecdote is worth extracting.

The sentries at the gates of the chteau of St. Cloud had orders to
allow no person in plain clothes and carrying a parcel, to enter the
private courts and gardens. One of the dauphins servants, not in
livery, wished to pass through a door kept by the Swiss guards. The
sentry would not allow it, and the servant appealed to the subaltern on
guard, who was pacing up and down near the gate. You may be one of
Monseigneurs servants, the officer politely replied, and that parcel
may, as you say, belong to His Royal Highness, but I do not know you,
and I must obey orders. The lacquey got angry, was insolent, and
attempted to force a passage. Thereupon, the officer, a young man of
most estimable character, pushed him sharply away, and told him that if
he renewed the attempt he should be sent to the guard-house.

From his window the dauphin saw admission refused to his servant.
Without reflection or inquiry, he ran down stairs like a madman, went up
to the lieutenant, abused him violently, without listening to his
defence, and at last so far forgot himself as to tear off his epaulets,
and threaten him with his sword. Then the officer, indignant at seeing
himself thus dishonoured in front of his men, when in fact he had done
no more than his duty, took two steps backwards, clapped hand on hilt,
and exclaimed, Monseigneur, keep your distance! Just then, the
dauphine, informed of this scene, hurried down, and carried off her
husband to his apartments. I entreat you, sir, said she to the
officer, forget what has passed! You shall hear further from me.

The same evening the king was told of this affair, which might have
had very serious consequences, for all the officers of the Swiss guards
were about to send in their resignations. As ex-colonel-general of the
Swiss, Charles X. was too partial to them not to reprimand his son
severely for the scandal he had caused. To make the matter up, and give
satisfaction to the corps of officers, he desired the dauphine to send
for the insulted lieutenant, and, in presence of that princess, who
anxiously desired to see her husbands unpardonable act atoned for and
forgotten, the king addressed the young officer with great affability.
Sir, he said, my son has behaved most culpably towards you, and
towards me, your former colonel-general. Accept these captains
epaulets, which I have great pleasure in offering you, and forget the
past? With much emotion the dauphine added a few gracious words, and
the officer, not without reluctance, continued in the royal guard as
captain. The dauphin, who was good in the main, did not fail, the next
time he saw the new made captain, to offer him his hand in sign of
reconciliation, and, by a singular chance, this officer was one of the
last Swiss on duty with the royal family when it departed for Cherbourg
on its way into exile.

How striking the picture of regal dignity here presented to us! The heir
to the French throne scuffling in his own palace yard with a subaltern
of foreign mercenaries, and rescued by his wife from possible
chastisement at the hands of his opponent. The king compelled to
apologize for his sons misconduct, and almost to crave the acceptance
of a captains commission as plaster for the wounded honour of the Swiss
guardsman. There is an unmistakeable Bourbon character about the story.
And truly, both in great things and small, what a pitiful race of kings
were those older Bourbons! Fit only to govern some petty German state of
a few dozen square miles, where they might revel in etiquette, surround
themselves with priests and flatterers, and play by turns the tyrant and
the fool. High time was it that a more vigorous branch should oust them
from the throne of a Francis, a Henry, and a Napoleon. The hour of their
downfal was at hand, although they, as ever, were blind to the
approaching peril. And little thought the glittering train of gay
courtiers and loyal ladies who thronged to Rheims to the coronation of
Charles the Tenth, that this ceremony was the last sacrifice offered to
the last descendant of St. Louis, and that the corpse of Louis XVIII.
would wait in vain, in the regal vault at St. Denis, for that of his
successor.[2]

In 1826, M. Appert was elected member of the Royal Society of Prisons,
of which the Dauphin was president, and about the same time he became a
frequent visiter at the Palais Royal. The Duke of Orleans took much
notice of him, and begged him to pay particular attention to the schools
and prisons upon his extensive domains. Madame Adelaide (Mademoiselle
dOrleans, as she was then styled) desired his assistance for the
establishment of a school near her castle of Randan; and the Duchess of
Orleans craved his advice in the distribution of her charities. He
passed some time at Randan, where the whole Orleans family were
assembled, and he describes their rational, cheerful, and simple manner
of life. It was that of opulent and well-educated country gentlemen,
hospitable, charitable, and intellectual. Kingly cares had not yet
wrinkled the brow of Louis Philippe; neither had sorrow, anxiety, and
alarm furrowed the cheeks of the virtuous Marie Amlie. At that time,
both Mademoiselle and Monseigneur were gay and cheerful. Since royalty
has replaced that life of princely retirement, I have never seen them
enjoy such calm and tranquil days; I might say, never such happy ones.
From Randan, M. Appert started on a tour to the south of France, and to
visit the galleys. When he returned to Paris, he undertook to assist the
Duchess of Orleans and Mademoiselle in their charities; and from that
time he saw them every two or three days, sometimes oftener. At last
came the July Revolution. The Orleans family were at Neuilly, and
whilst the result of the fight between king and people was still
uncertain, the duke, apprehensive of violence from the royalist party,
shut himself up in a little pavilion in the park. There his wife and
sister secretly visited him, and took him the news as it arrived from
Paris. From his retreat, he plainly heard the din of battle raging in
the streets of the capital. On the 28th of July, a cannon-ball, fired
from Courbevoye, fell near the palace, and at a short distance from the
duchess and her sister-in-law. There could be little doubt of the
intention of the shot. This circumstance made Mademoiselle think, that
in their fury the royalists might attack Neuilly, and carry off the
family. Accordingly, the duke, accompanied only by his faithful adherent
Oudard, left his retreat, and crossed the country on foot to Raincy,
another of his seats, situated near Bondy. This was on the 29th July;
the duke was dressed very simply, and wore a gray hat with a tri-colored
cockade. As soon as the cannon shot was fired from Courbevoye,
Mademoiselle said to the duchess, My dear, we cannot stand by those
people any longer; they massacre the mob, and fire at us; we must take a
decided part. Hastening to her wardrobe, she tore up several silk
dresses, white, blue, and red, made them into cockades, and distributed
them to the household. From that moment, it is evident, that if the
royalists had had the upper hand, the house of Orleans was ruined.

On their way to Raincy, the duke and Oudard fell in with a peasant,
digging his field as if nothing extraordinary was occurring. They asked
him the news. _Ma foi, Monsieur_, replied the man, they say that the
people are thrashing the royal guard, that those stupid Bourbons have
run, and that liberty will once more triumph.

And the Duke of Orleans? was the next question. What do they say of
him?

No doubt he is with his cousins, since he has not shown himself at his
Palais Royal. Hes no better than the rest; a fine talker, and nothing
else.

Not overpleased at the peasants reply, the duke asked no more
questions, but continued his pedestrian journey. Forty-eight hours
afterwards, however, he was at the Palais Royal, with the men of July
for his body-guard; and ten days later he was King of the French. How
far he owed his elevation to intrigues and manuvres of his own--how far
he had aimed at the crown which thus suddenly settled upon his
brows--are questions that have been much discussed, but never
satisfactorily elucidated. M. Apperts opinion is worth recording. To us
it appears a temperate and rational one.

I consider it proved that the Duke of Orleans did not, as many believe,
work for the overthrow of his cousins. As a shrewd and clever man, he
could not forget the chances given to his family by the retrograde
policy of the Bourbons; he remembered that he had five sons, brought up
in the public colleges, partaking the intelligence and opinions of the
rising generation, and therefore secure of public sympathy; he bore in
mind also, that the Duke of Bordeaux, who alone stood above his sons, in
the sense of legitimacy, but far below them in the opinion of the
masses, was still very young, and liable to the diseases of childhood.
All these were so many motives for him to court that popularity which
the Tuileries each day lost. He did not omit to do so. He showed himself
cordial and affable with the popular members of the Chambers, adopted
and sustained the system of mutual instruction, which was protected by
the liberal section of the nation, in opposition to the priests, and
founded schools on that plan on his estates. A generous patron of
artists and men of letters, for political refugees, Poles, Greeks, and
Italians, he was ever ready to subscribe. In short, without conspiring,
the Duke of Orleans did as much to advance the royal destiny of his
family as the elder branch, by a completely contrary line of conduct,
did to compromise theirs.

If these were the sole arts and conjurations used by Louis Philippe to
compass his ends, certainly no crown was ever more fairly come by than
his. And verily so uneasy a station, so thorny a seat as that of King
of the French, was scarce worth more active efforts; it would have been
dearly bought by a sacrifice of honour and principle. The life of Louis
Philippe, is one of incessant toil and anxiety; his leisure is less, his
work harder, than that of his meanest subject. Late to bed, he rises
early, rarely sleeping more than four hours; after a careful, but rapid
toilet, his days labour begins. He seldom breakfasts with his family;
it would take too much time; but has his frugal repast brought on a tray
to the room where he happens to be. When he was Duke of Orleans, he read
all the letters and petitions addressed to him, writing upon each an
opinion or an order for the guidance of his secretaries. This practice
he was of course obliged to discontinue when he became king. At the
commencement of his reign, the number of letters and applications of
various kinds, sent to the different members of the royal family,
amounted to the astonishing number of a thousand or twelve hundred
a-day. Although, upon an average, not above fifty of these possessed the
least interest, or deserved an answer, the mere reading and classing of
such a chaos of correspondence gave employment to several secretaries.
After a while, the flood of petitions abated, but M. Appert estimates
them, in ordinary times, at six to eight hundred daily. Of the letters,
only the important ones are laid before the King, who answers many of
them himself. He examines the reports, projects, and nominations brought
to him by his ministers, and, at least twice or thrice a-week, presides
at the council-board. Private audiences occupy much of his time; his
conferences with architects, with the intendants of the civil list and
of his private estates, are of frequent occurrence. The galleries of
Versailles, and the improvements at Fontainebleau--all made after his
plans, and in great measure under his personal
superintendence--court-balls and dinners, diplomatic audiences,
correspondence with foreign courts, journeys of various kinds, visits to
the castle of Eu and to military camps--such are a portion of the
innumerable claims upon the time of the King of the French. But, by a
clear-headed, active, and earnest man, endowed with the faculty of
order, which Louis Philippe possesses in a very high degree, much is to
be got through in a day of twenty hours; and, after doing all that has
been enumerated, and many other things of less importance, the king
still finds time to devote to his family, for the necessary healthful
exercise, and for the perusal of the principal newspapers and
publications, both English and foreign. Each morning, either before or
after breakfast, _all_ the newspapers, political pamphlets, even
caricatures, were laid upon the table, and the king and the princes were
the first to read aloud the articles published against them. They
examined the caricatures, and passed them to the bystanders, saying,
What do you think of this?

The taunt of parsimony has ever been prominent amongst the weapons of
offence employed against the July monarchy by the French opposition
press. The avarice of the Civil List, the candle-end economies of the
Chteau, the _maigre chre_ of M. de Montalivet, have been harped upon
till they have become bywords in the mouths of the mob, always eager to
detect the petty failings of their superiors. They have been a fertile
subject of pun, sneer, and witticism for those pasquinading periodicals
which care little for truth or justice so long as they can tickle the
popular palate, and keep up their circulation; a perfect treasure for
such loose and ephemeral prints as the _Charivari_ and the _Corsaire_,
the _Figaro_ and the _Tintamarre_. Even graver journals, the dull and
fanatical organs of the Legitimatists, have, in a graver tone, made
scornful reference to degrading and unkingly avarice, whilst that witty
monomaniac, the editor of the _Mode_, has launched the keen shafts of
his unsparing ridicule against the _mesquinerie_ of the usurping
princes. It is easy to get up and sustain such a cry as this, against
which it would be beneath the dignity of the persons assailed, and of
their newspaper organs, to contend; and, when supported by a rattling
fire of squib and jeer, daily printed for the reading of a people who,
of all others, are most apt to prefer their jest to their friend, it is
any thing but surprising that a fabrication should acquire credit, a
falsehood be accepted as truth. We believe there is no ground for
accusing the Orleans family of avarice. True, they do not, in imitation
of some of their predecessors, indulge in a reckless prodigality, and
squander enormous sums upon profligate courtiers and lewd women. They
better understand the proper distribution of their great wealth. They do
not gamble, or maintain _petites maisons_, or establish a
_Parc-aux-cerfs_, or commit any other of the disgraceful extravagancies
for which so many Bourbons have made themselves conspicuous. In this
respect they have improved upon the traditions even of their own house.
Louis Philippe must be admitted to be a great improvement, both as a
private and public man, upon his dissolute and disreputable forefathers,
even by those bitter and malicious foes who convert his habits of order
and proper economy into a grave offence. We learn from M. Appert to what
extent he sins in these particulars. To preserve his health, which is
excellent, he lives very simply. At dinner, he rarely eats any thing but
soup and a solid slice of roast beef; but the twenty-five or thirty
persons who daily surround his board are subjected to no such frugal
diet. The royal table is perfectly well served; the wines, especially,
are old and delicious, and the king takes as much care of his guests as
if he were a private gentleman giving a dinner. The intendant of the
household submits each days bill of fare for the queens approval.
Such, at least, was the custom in the time of M. Appert, whose personal
experience of the court, as far as we can judge from his Memoirs,--for
he is sparing of dates,--extends up to the year 1837.

The king takes particular care of his clothes; and I once saw him in a
very bad humour because he had torn his coat against a door. The papers
in his private study, the books in his library, are arranged with great
order, and he does not like to have their places changed in his absence.
Whilst conversing, his majesty amuses himself by making envelopes for
letters, and often makes those for the large despatches serve twice, by
turning them. He has the habit of wasting nothing, not even a thing of
small value, that can again be made available. He loves neither play nor
field-sports: of an evening, in his domestic circle, he sometimes amuses
himself with a game at billiards, but seldom for long together; for it
is very rare that he can get more than an hour to himself, uninterrupted
by the arrival of important despatches, by the visits of ministers or
foreign ambassadors.

We discern nothing very reprehensible in the harmless little
peculiarities here enumerated. It may be stingy and unkingly to dislike
being robbed, and in that case Louis Philippe is to blame, for we are
told that he keeps a watchful eye over the expenses of his household. On
the other hand, he is generous to prodigality in the repairs and
embellishments of his palaces and domains; thus giving employment to
many, and preparing for posterity monuments of his magnificence and of
his princely encouragement of the artists and men of genius of his day.
He has no abstract love of gold, no partiality for gloating over
money-bags: his expenses, on the contrary, often exceed his income, and
entail debts upon his civil list and private fortune. He has an open
hand for his friends, a charitable heart for the poor. Party feeling
should not blind us to private virtue. Even those who least admire the
public conduct of Louis Philippe, who dislike his system of government,
and blame his tortuous foreign policy, may, whilst censuring the conduct
of the king, admit and admire the good qualities of the individual.

I remember, says M. Appert, when speaking of the subordinate officers
of the royal household, that one of these gentlemen, having amassed, a
great deal too rapidly, a certain competency, asked the kings
permission to leave his service, and return to his own province, where
an _aunt_, he said, had left him a pretty income. I have not the least
objection, replied his majesty; I only hope that I have not been your
_uncle_! And with this good-humoured remark, the heir, whether of dead
aunt or living uncle, was allowed to retire upon his new-found fortune.
Another anecdote, highly characteristic of him of whom it is told, may
here be introduced. The burial-place of the house of Orleans is at
Dreux. From an exaggerated feeling of regard or friendship, or whatever
it may be called, the dowager-duchess, mother of the king, inserted in
her will an earnest wish, indeed an injunction, that her intendant, M.
de Folleville, should be buried in the outer vault, which precedes that
of the Orleans family, and that a slab with his name and quality should
close his grave. The king duly complied with his mothers wish, but
caused the inscribed side of the slab to be placed inwards, thus
fulfilling the desire of the duchess without exposing her to the
ill-natured comments of future generations.

M. Appert takes us even into the royal bed-chamber. He does so with all
proper discretion, and we will venture to follow him thither.

The king and queen always occupy the same bed, which is almost as broad
as it is long, but whose two halves are very differently composed. On
one side is a plain horse-hair mattress, on the other an excellent
feather-bed. The latter is for the queen. The princes and princesses are
accustomed, like the king, to sleep on a single mattress. There is
always a light in their majesties apartment, _and two pistols are
placed upon a table near the king_.

Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown! In this instance, however,
the pistol practice is the result probably of an old habit rather than
of any apprehension of a night attack upon the Tuileries. We have passed
the days when kings were stabbed in their beds or poisoned in their
cups; and the attempts of the Fieschis and Lecomtes do not appear to
prey upon the robust health or dwell upon the imagination of their
intended victim. With Marie Amlie it is very different. The anxieties
and sorrows she has experienced since 1830 have been terrible; and
doubtless she has wished many times that her husband had never exchanged
his retirement at Neuilly, his circle of friends at the Palais Royal,
for his present exalted but difficult and dangerous station. Ah! M.
Appert, she more than once exclaimed, he who invented the proverb,
Happy as a king, had certainly never worn a crown! When we
contemplate the careworn and suffering, but benevolent and interesting
countenance of the virtuous Queen of the French, and call to mind all
her trials during the last fifteen years, the constant attempts on the
kings life, the death of the Princess Mary and of the much-loved Duke
of Orleans, and the perils incurred by her other sons in Africa, how can
we doubt the sincerity of this exclamation? In unaffected piety, and in
charity that blushes to be seen, this excellent princess finds
consolation. M. Appert becomes enthusiastic when he speaks of her
unassuming virtues, to which, however, his testimony was scarcely
needed. None, we believe, not even her husbands greatest enemies, have
ever ventured to deny them.

The queen disposes of five hundred thousand francs a-year for all her
personal expenses; and certainly she gives more than four hundred
thousand in charity of all kinds. M. Appert, she would sometimes say
to me, give those five hundred francs, we spoke of, but put them down
upon next months list, _for the waters are low, my purse is empty_.
Imposture, ingratitude, even the insolent form of the petitions
addressed to her, fail to discourage her in her benevolent mission.
Madam, an old Bonapartist lady one day wrote to her, if the Bourbons
had not returned to France--for the misfortune of the nation--my beloved
mistress and protectress, the Empress Maria Louisa, would still be upon
the throne, and I should not be under the humiliating necessity of
telling you that I am without bread, and that the wretched mattress upon
which I sleep is about to be thrown out of the garret I inhabit, because
my years rent is unpaid! I dare not ask you for assistance, for my
heart is with my real sovereign, and I cannot promise you my gratitude.
If, however, you think proper to preserve a life which, since the
misfortunes of my country, has been so full of bitterness, I will accept
a loan: I should blush to receive a gift. I am, madam, your servant,
Ch----r.

Here was a pretty letter to set before a queen; a mode of imploring alms
that might well have disgusted the most charitable. But what was Maria
Amlies reply to the precious epistle. She was accustomed to open all
the petitions addressed to her--and numerous indeed they were--with her
own hand, and to write upon many of them instructions for M. Appert.
When the impertinent missive of the Bonapartist reached that gentleman,
the following lines had been added to it:--She must be very unhappy for
she is very unjust. A hundred francs to be sent to her immediately; and
I beg M. Appert to make inquiries concerning this ladys circumstances.
M. Appert, indignant at the tone of the letter, ventured to remonstrate;
but the queen insisted, and even tripled her intended donation, in case
it should be required by her singular petitioner, whom her almoner
accordingly proceeded to visit. I knocked at a worm-eaten door, on the
fifth floor of a house in the Rue St. Andr des Arts, and a lady dressed
in black (it was her only gown,) opened it.

Sir, said she, much agitated, are you the commissary of police come
to arrest me for my shameful letter to the queen? You must forgive me: I
am so unhappy that at times I become deranged. I am sorry to have
written as I did to a princess whom all the poor call good and
charitable.

Be not alarmed, madam, I replied, taking her petition from my pocket.
Read her majestys orders; they will enable you to judge of her better
than any thing I could tell you.

Madame C. read the affecting words added by the queen; then, bursting
into tears, she pressed the paper to her lips. Sir, she exclaimed,
give me nothing, but leave me this holy relic. I will die of hunger
with it upon my heart.

Madame C. proving in all respects worthy of the queens generosity, I
left her the three hundred francs, but had much difficulty in prevailing
on her to give up the petition, which I still preserve with respect and
veneration. This trait of the Queen of the French is only one of ten
thousand.

Madame Adelaide dOrleans vies in charity with her sister-in-law; and,
although she has no separate establishment at Paris, but lives always
with the king, her generosity and the expenses of frequent journeys, and
of a certain retinue which she is compelled to maintain, have sometimes
caused her temporary embarrassments. Thus is it, she one day said to
M. Appert, with reference to a loan she had contracted, that royalty
enriches us. People ask what the king does with his money, and to
satisfy them, it would be necessary to publish the names of honourable
friends of liberty, who, in consequence of misfortunes, have solicited
and obtained from him sums of twenty, thirty, forty, and even of three
hundred thousand francs. They forget all the extraordinary expenses my
brother has had to meet, all the demands he has to comply with. Out of
his revenues he has finished the Palais Royal, improved the appanages of
the house of Orleans, and yet, sooner or later, all that property will
revert to the State. When we returned to France, our inheritance was so
encumbered, that my brother was advised to decline administering to the
estate; but to that neither he nor I would consent. For all these
things, people make no allowance. Truly, M. Appert, we know not how to
act to inspire the confidence which our opinions and our consciences
tell us we fully deserve.

This was spoken on the 23d January, 1832, and written down the same
evening, by M. Appert. Madame Adelaide had then been too short a time a
kings sister, to have become acquainted with the bitters as well as the
sweets of that elevated position,--to have experienced the thorns that
lurk amongst the roses of a crown. Doubtless she has since learned, that
calumny, misrepresentation, and unmerited censure, are inevitable
penalties of royalty, their endurance forming part of the moral tax
pitilessly levied upon the great ones of the earth.

So liberal an almsgiver as the Queen of the French, and one whose
extreme kindness of heart is so universally known, is of course
peculiarly liable to imposition; and the principal duty of M. Appert was
to investigate the merits of the claimants on the royal bounty, and to
prevent it, as far as possible, from passing into unworthy hands. For
this office his acquaintance with the prisons and galleys, with the
habits, tricks, and vices of the poor, peculiarly fitted him. He
discovered innumerable deceits, whose authors had hoped, by their
assistance, to extract an undeserved dole from the coffers of the queen.
Literary men, assuming that designation on the strength of an obscure
pamphlet or obscene volume, and who, when charity was refused them,
often demanded a bribe to exclude a venomous attack on the royal family
from the columns of some scurrilous journal; sham refugees from all
countries; old officers, whose campaigns had never taken them out of
Paris, and whose red ribbon, given to them by _lAutre_, on the field of
Wagram or Marengo, was put into their button-hole on entering the house,
and hastily taken out on leaving it, lest the police should inquire what
right they had to its wear: such were a few of the many classes of
imposters detected by M. Appert. One insatiable lady sent, regularly
every day, two or three petitions to various members of the royal
family, considering them as so many lottery tickets, sure, sooner or
later, to bring a prize. She frankly confessed to M. Appert the
principle she went upon. Petitions, she said, like advertisements in
the newspapers, end by yielding a profit to those who patiently
reiterate them. Persons who constantly see my name, and hear that I have
eighteen children, come at last to pity and relieve my distress, which
is real. This woman was, as she said, in real difficulties, but
nevertheless it was impossible to comply with all her demands. When, by
M. Apperts advice, the queen and Madame Adelaide refused to do so, this
pertinacious petitioner got up a melodramatic effect, borrowed from the
Porte St Martin, or some other Boulevard theatre. She wrote a letter,
announcing that if she did not receive immediate assistance she had made
every preparation to suffocate herself with charcoal that same evening.
Then this good queen would send for me, and say, Mon Dieu! M. Appert,
Madame R. is going to kill herself. It is a great crime, and we must
prevent it. Be so good as to send her forty francs. And to prevent my
raising objections to this too great goodness, her majesty would add
immediately, I know what you are about to say: that she deceives me,
and will not kill herself; but if it did happen, God would not forgive
us. It is better to be deceived than to risk such a misfortune.

There exist regular joint-stock companies, composed of swindlers leagued
together for the plunder of the charitable. Some of the members feign
misfortune and misery, and send petitions to the queen, and ministers,
or to any one known as rich or benevolent; whilst others, well dressed
and decorated, assume the character of protectors of the unfortunate,
and answer for the respectability and deserts of the _protgs_. M.
Appert describes a lodging rented by one of these companies. It might
have furnished Eugene Sue with a chapter in his Mysteries of Paris.
It consisted of two rooms. In one were a wretched truckle-bed, two
broken chairs, an old table; the other was well furnished with excellent
chairs, a mahogany table, and clean curtains. The door connecting the
rooms was carefully masked by a hanging of old paper, similar to that of
the outer one; the bed was a dirty straw mattress. The impostor who
occupied these lodgings received her visiters in the shabby room, and
there she looked so miserable, that it was impossible to help relieving
her. The charitable person or persons gone, she transferred herself to
the inner apartment, and led a joyous life with her confederates and
fellow-petitioners. There are in Paris as many as fifty of these immoral
associations, which the police does not interfere with, because it finds
most of their members serviceable as spies. The suicide-dodge seems a
favourite resource of male as well as female impostors. Mr. B.,
formerly in the army, now a gambler, always carried two loaded pistols
in his pocket, (the balls forgotten, very likely,) and when he came to
ask me for assistance, which was at least a hundred times a-year, he
invariably threatened to blow out his brains in my room; having left, he
said, a letter to a newspaper for which he wrote, publishing to Europe
the avarice of the royal family, and the baseness of those about them,
beginning, of course, with myself. When I refused to yield to his
threats, Mr. B. changed his mind, and consented to live, but with the
sole object of injuring me in every possible way; and, according to
promise, this worthy man of letters wrote against me in _his_ newspaper,
and sent anonymous letters to the Tuileries.

Exiled Polish princes, Italian patriots, veterans of all possible armies
and services, moustached to the eyes, their coats covered with crosses,
their breasts, as they affirmed, with scars; aid-de-camps of half the
kings and generals in the world; wounded and fever-stricken soldiers
from Algeria;--these were a few of the false titles to charity
impudently advanced by the mob of rogues and impostors, who daily
crowded M. Apperts anti-chamber, giving it the aspect of a guard-room
or of the dept of some house of correction, and displaying in their
tales of wo astonishing address and ingenuity. And in spite of the
immense army of gendarmes and police-spies, who are supposed to envelop
France in the vast net of their vigilance--and who certainly succeed in
rendering it as unlike a land of liberty as a free country well can
be--in spite of the complicated passport system, having for one of its
chief objects the check of crime and fraud, we find that these
jail-birds had always passports and certificates, and were often
provided with letters of recommendation from persons of rank and wealth,
who found it easier to sign their name than to draw their purse-strings.
I possess more than fifteen hundred letters and notes, large and small,
from peers of France, generals, ex-ministers, and others, recommending
petitioners; and sometimes, when I met these complaisant patrons, they
knew not even the name of those they had thus supported. The visits of
these illustrious persons often lost me a great deal of time; and what
astonished me beyond measure was, that the possession of a hundred or a
hundred and fifty thousand francs a-year did not prevent these rich
misers from tormenting me. They would lose two or three hours rather
than pay down a penny. The son-in-law of one of the richest proprietors
in France once wrote me a most humble and suppliant letter, begging me
to obtain from the Queen a grant of thirty francs to one of his
domestics, who, through old age, was compelled to leave his service.
And many an enemy did M. Appert make by noncompliance with the requests
of the wealthy skin-flints, who sought to do a charitable act at
anothers expense. The Queen and the Princess Adelaide often received
petitions from ladies of the court, who expatiated on the interesting
and deserving character of those they recommended. Nevertheless, M.
Appert was always desired to inquire into the real merits of the case,
and frequently found that it was not one deserving of succour. Then the
queen or princess would say, when next they were importuned on the
subject, My dear countess, M. Appert has been to see your _protge_,
has made due inquiry, and finds that we have many upon our list in far
greater need of assistance. I am sorry, therefore, to be unable to
comply with your wishes. Here, of course, was an enemy for poor M.
Appert, who certainly needs the approbation of his own conscience as
reward for having gratuitously held so thankless an office. His
functions were no light ones, and took up nearly his whole time. His
position relatively to the royal family compelled him to receive a vast
number of persons of all ranks and classes, some of them of no very
respectable description, but who were useful in procuring him
information. Once or twice a month the Phrenological Society held its
sittings at his house. During one of these meetings two heads were
brought into the room in a basket, and placed with great care upon the
table. I thought they were in wax; the eyes were open, the faces
placid. Upon approaching, I recognised the features of the assassins,
Lacenaire and Avril, whom I had seen in their dungeons. Do you find
them like, M. Appert? said the man who had brought them. I replied in
the affirmative. No wonder, said he, they are not more than four
hours off their shoulders. They were the actual heads of the two
murderers. Not satisfied with having the heads, our philanthropical
phrenologist had the headsman. We have already referred to the less
scientific but more convivial meetings held at M. Apperts house, in the
shape of dinners, given each Saturday, and at which the guests were
all, in some way or other, men of mark. Sometimes the notorious Vidocq,
and Samson, the executioner of Paris--son of the man who decapitated
Louis the Sixteenth, Marie Antoinette, and many other illustrious
victims--took their places at M. Apperts table. When this occurred, all
his friends were anxious for an invitation. The only two who declined
meeting the thief-taker and the headsman, were the archbishop of
Malines, and M. Arnault, of the French Academy, brother-in-law of
Regnaut de St. Jean dAngely, who was so influential a person in the
time of Napoleon. There were others, however, whom M. Arnault disliked
to meet. He had a great prejudice against writers of the romantic
school, and especially against Dumas, whom he called a washed-out negro.
If M. Appert wanted an abrupt refusal, he merely had to say to him,
Dine with me on Saturday next. I shall have Balzac and Alexander
Dumas. Caustic in manner, but good and amiable, M. Arnault cherished
the memory of Napoleon with a fidelity that did him honour. In the court
of his house grew a willow, sprung from a slip of that at St. Helena.
After 1830, misfortune overtook him, and M. Appert tried to interest the
king and Madame Adelaide in his behalf. He was successful, and a
librarians place was promised to his friend. But the promise was all
that M. Arnault ever obtained. The ill-will or obstinacy of the
minister, who had the power of nomination, is assigned by M. Appert as
the cause of the disappointment, which he hesitates to attribute to
lukewarmness on the part of his royal patrons. Louis Philippe is the
last man, according to our notion of him, to suffer himself to be
thwarted by a minister, whether in great or small things. Kings, whose
position exposes them to so much solicitation, should be especially
cautious in promising, strictly on their guard against the odious vice,
too common in the world, of lightly pledging and easily breaking their
word. They, above all men, should ever bear in mind that a broken
promise is but a lie inverted.

We return to M. Apperts dinners. To meet Samson and Vidocq, he had
invited the late Lord Durham, Dr. Bowring, De Jouy the academician,
Admiral Laplace, and several others. The executioner sat on his right,
the policeman on his left, and both occasionally favoured him with a
confidential _a parte_. Samson was grave and serious, rather out of his
element amongst the _grand seigneurs_, as he called them; Vidocq, on the
contrary, was gay, lively, and quite at his ease.

Do you know, said he, with a laugh, to the headsman, I have often
sent you customers when I was chief of the brigade of safety?

I know you have, M. Vidocq, replied Samson. Then, in a low voice to
me, Any where but in your house, sir, I should hardly like to dine in
company with that joker. Hes a queer one. Almost at the same moment,
Vidocq whispered, Hes a worthy man, that Monsieur Samson; but all the
same, it seems odd to me to sit at the same table with him. Very good,
the spy; not bad, the hangman. In the conversation that followed, Lord
Durham and the accomplished Hermite de la Chausse dAntin took a share,
and Samson gave some curious details concerning his terrible profession.
He was on the scaffold when Louis XVI. was executed. We all loved the
king in our family, said he, and when my father was obliged, according
to orders, to take up the head by the hair and show it to the people,
the sight of that royal countenance, which preserved all its noble and
gentle expression, so affected him that he nearly swooned away. Luckily
I was there, and being tall, I masked him from the crowd, so that his
tears and emotion, which in those days might have sufficed to bring us
to the guillotine in our turn, passed unobserved. Presently Vidocq
ventured a joke, concerning the headsmans office, which greatly
offended him of the axe, who muttered his displeasure in M. Apperts
ear. That man is as coarse as barley bread, was his remark: it is
easy to see he is not used to good society; _he does not behave himself
as I do_! Poor Samson, who receives about five hundred a year for the
performance of his melancholy duties, was, in reality, very well
behaved. His appearance was so respectable, his black coat, gold chain,
and frilled shirt, so irreproachable, that on his first visit to M.
Appert, that gentlemans secretary took him for some village mayor on
his way to a wedding, or about to head a deputation to the king. Upon
Lord Durhams expressing a wish to see the guillotine, he obligingly
offered to show it to him. M. Appert gives an account of the visit. On
the following Saturday, Lord Durham, accompanied by his nephew, heir, I
believe, to his title and vast fortune, came in his carriage to fetch
me. He had told so many English of our intended visit, that we were
followed by a string of vehicles, like the procession to a funeral. On
our way, Lord Durham asked me if it were not possible to buy a sheep to
try the guillotine upon. On my telling him that to do so would give just
grounds for severe criticisms, he did not press his wish. On reaching
the Rue du Marais, I went alone into Samsons house. He was in a full
dress suit of black, waiting to receive us. He conducted our party, at
least fifty in number, to the banks of the Canal St. Martin, where, in a
coachmakers shed, the guillotine was kept. Here there was a fine
opportunity for the display of a genuine English characteristic. Every
body wished to touch every thing; to handle the hatchet and baskets, and
get upon the plank which supports the body when the head is fitted into
the fatal frame. Samson had had the guillotine repainted and put
together, and bundles of straw served to show its terrible power.

At another dinner, to which Samson and Vidocq were invited, Balzac and
Dumas were present, and the talk was most amusing. For romance writers,
the conversation of such men must possess especial interest and value.
Of Vidocq, M. Appert speaks very highly, with respect both to his head
and heart. He began life as a soldier under Dumouriez, and was sent to
prison for forging a passport. Endowed with great intelligence and
physical strength, and with a restless activity of mind and body, he
made his escape, and opened a negotiation for a free pardon, on which
condition he promised to render great services to the police. His offer
was accepted and he kept his word. M. Appert considers his skill as a
police agent unsurpassable. It is perhaps in gratitude for that
gentlemans good opinion that Vidocq has bequeathed him his head, should
he die first, for the purpose of phrenological investigations. We find
two or three interesting traits and anecdotes of the thief-catcher. A
report once got abroad that he had an only daughter to marry, and as he
was supposed to be rich, he immediately received a host of offers for
her hand, many of them from young men of excellent family, but in needy
circumstances. Vidocq, who had no children, was vastly amused at this
sudden eagerness for the honour of his alliance. Samson has two pretty
daughters, who are well brought up and even accomplished, and who will
probably marry the sons of the executioners of large towns. Hangmen,
like kings, can only wed in their own sphere. Samson, who was grateful
for the politeness shown him by Lord Durham, thought it might please
that nobleman to possess the clothes worn by remarkable criminals, and
offered to send them to me. Thus I had for some time in my possession
the coats worn at their execution by Fieschi, Lacenaire, and Alibaud. It
was one of Samsons assistants who brought them, and each time I gave
him fifteen francs as compensation, the clothes being his perquisites.
M. Appert relates many other curious particulars concerning French
executioners, and gives a remarkable letter from Samson himself,
relating to the guillotine, to the punishment of branding, and to the
old tax called _navage_, which was formerly levied, to the profit of the
headsman, on all grain and fruits entering Paris. This tax gave rise to
many disputes and discussions between the country people and the men
appointed to collect it, who received from the peasants the title of
_valets de bourreau_. From that time dates the French proverb, Insolent
as a hangmans lacquey.

Of the four sons of Louis Philippe, M. Appert speaks in terms of very
high praise. Doubtless they are well-informed and accomplished princes,
although, as yet, none of them have given indications of striking
talents or high qualities; possibly because they have lacked
opportunities for their display. Not one of them enjoys the prestige and
popularity of the late Duke of Orleans. The Prince de Joinville, by his
handsome person, and frank, off-hand manners, also by his antipathy,
real or supposed, to the English, and by his occasional indulgence in a
bit of harmless clap-trap and rhodomontade, has acquired the favour and
good opinion of certain classes of the French people, who behold in him
the man destined, at some future day, to humble the maritime power of
England, and to take the British fleet into Brest or Cherbourg, as
Gulliver towed the hostile men-of-war into the port of Liliput. We trust
it will be long before he has an opportunity of displaying his prowess,
or of disappointing the expectations of his admirers. The Duke of
Nemours, against whom nothing can be alleged, who has distinguished
himself in Algeria, and who is represented, by those who best know him,
as a man of sense and moderate views, zealous for the welfare of his
country, has been far less successful than his nautical brother, in
captivating the sympathies of the bulk of the nation. This can only be
attributed to his manners, which are reserved, and thought to indicate
pride; but this seeming haughtiness is said to disappear upon nearer
acquaintance. Of the two younger brothers, the characters have yet to be
developed. It has been affirmed that the natural abilities of the Duke
of Aumale are superior to those of either of his seniors. As far as can
be judged by the scanty opportunities they have hitherto had of
displaying them, the military talents of the French princes are
respectable. Their personal courage is undoubted. But for the opposition
of the king and of their anxious mother, they would, according to M.
Appert, be continually in Africa, heading and serving as examples to the
troops. Bravery, however, whose absence is accounted a crime in the
private soldier, can hardly be made a merit of in men whose royal blood
raises them, when scarcely beyond boyhood, to the highest ranks in the
service. And the best wish that can be formed on behalf of the princes
of France, of their country, and of Europe, is that their military
experience may ever be limited, as, with some slight exceptions, it has
hitherto been, to the superintendence of field-days, and the harmless
manuvres of Mediterranean squadrons.




MILDRED;

A TALE.

CHAP. IV.


A few days afterwards the Bloomfields also and Miss Willoughby left
Brussels for Paris.

It is far from our purpose to follow them step by step upon their route.
The little love-affair we have undertaken to relate, leads us a dance
upon the Continent; but we have no disposition to play the tourist one
moment more than is necessary; and as no incidents connected with our
story occurred in Paris, we shall not loiter long even in that gayest
and most seductive of capitals. He who knows Paris--and who does
not?--and at all understands what sort of traveller Mildred was, will
easily conceive the delight she felt in visiting the public monuments,
ancient and modern; in observing its populace, so diversified and mobile
in their expression, so sombre and so gay; in traversing the different
quarters of a city which still retains in parts whatever is most
picturesque in the structures of the middle ages, whilst it certainly
displays whatever is most tasteful in modern architecture, and which, in
fact, in every sense of the word, is the most complete summary of human
life that exists upon the face of the earth.

What modern city can boast a point of view comparable to that which
bursts upon the stranger as he enters the _Place de la Concorde_! What
beautiful architecture to his right and to his left!--the _Palais
Bourbon_, the distant Madeleine, the Chamber of Deputies--whilst before
him runs the long avenue of the Champs Elyses, terminated by its
triumphal arch. No crowding in of buildings. No darkening of the air.
Here is open space and open sky, trees and fountains, and a river
flowing through the scene. There is room to quarrel, no doubt, with some
of its details. Those two beautiful fountains in the centre are
beautiful only at a certain respectful distance; you must not approach
those discoloured nymphs who are each squeezing water out of the body of
the fish she holds in her arms. Nor can we ever reconcile ourselves to
that Egyptian obelisk which stands between them; in itself admirable
enough, but as much out of place as a sarcophagus in a drawing-room. But
these and other criticisms of the like kind, are to be made, if worth
while, on after reflection and a leisure examination; the first view
which the scene, as a whole, presents to the eye, is like enchantment.
So at least Mildred thought, when, the morning after their arrival,
(while the breakfast was waiting for her uncle, who was compensating
himself for the fatigues of the journey,) she coaxed her aunt to put her
arm in hers, and just turn round the corner--she knew from the map where
she was--and take one look at it whilst the sun was shining so brightly
above them.

Nor are there many cities, however boastful of their antiquities, which
present more picturesque views than meet the eye as, leaving the garden
of the Tuileries, you proceed up the river; and the round towers, with
their conical roofs, of the _Palais de Justice_, rise on the opposite
banks, and you catch glimpses of _Notre Dame_. In London, the houses
have crowded down to the edge of the water, and are standing up to their
ankles in it, so that the inhabitants may walk about its streets all
their lives, and never know that a river is flowing through their city.
From the centre of one of its bridges they may indeed assure themselves
of the fact, and confirm, by their own observations, what they had
learned in the geographical studies of their youth, that London is built
on the river Thames; but, even from this position, it is more wood than
water they will see. The shipping, and the boats of all kinds, blot out
the river, and so crush and overcharge it that it is matter of wonder
how it continues to exist and move under such a burden. It is otherwise
in Paris. There one walks along the quay, and sees the river flowing
through the city.

In spite of its revolutions, of its innovations, of its impatient
progress, there is much still in Paris to carry back the thoughts of a
visitor to antiquated times. If the Madeleine is a Grecian temple, if he
finds that religious ceremonies are performed there with an elegance and
propriety which propitiate the taste of the profane, if they fail to
satisfy the fervour of the devout--a short walk will bring him to the
venerable church of St. Germain, hard by the Louvre, where he will
encounter as much solemnity and antiquity as he can desire; an
antiquity, however, that is still alive, that is still worshipping as it
used to worship. He will see at the further extremity of the church a
dark, arched recess, imitative of a cavern or sepulchre, at the end of
which lies the Christ, pale and bleeding, visible only by the light of
tapers; and, if he goes to matins there, he will probably find himself
surrounded by a crowd of kneeling devotees, kneeling on the stone
pavement before this medival exhibition. Two distant ages seem to be
brought together and made contemporaries.

But we will not be tempted to loiter on our way even at Paris; we take
post horses and proceed with our party to Lyons.

A long ride, what an exceptional state it is!--what a chapter
apart--what a parenthesis in life! The days we pass rolling along the
road are always dropped out of the almanack; we have lost them, not in
the sublime sense of the Roman emperor, but fairly out of the calendar;
we cannot make up the tale of days and weeks. We start--especially if it
is in a foreign country that we are travelling--with how much
exhilaration! Every thing is new, and this charm of novelty lends an
interest to the most trivial things we encounter. Not one of the least
amusements of travel is this passing, in easy and rapid review, the
wayside novelties which the road, the village, and the street that we
scamper through, present to us. The changing costume of the peasant--the
whimsical, traditionary head-dress of the women, which, whimsical as it
is, retains its geographical boundaries with a constancy rarely found in
any _flora_ of the botanist--the oddly constructed vehicles, carts
fashioned upon all conceivable plans, and drawn by horses, or mules, or
oxen harnessed and decorated in what seems quite a masquerading
attire--these, and a thousand other things, in their nature the most
common and familiar, claim for _once_ the power to surprise us. All the
common-place of daily life comes before us,

    Trickd in this momentary wonderment.

Here in the south of France, for instance, a cart-horse approaches you
with a collar surmounted by a large upright horn, and furnished,
moreover, with two long curving _antenn_ branching from either side,
which, with the gay trappings that he wears, give to an old friend the
appearance of some monstrous specimen of entomology; you might expect
him to unfold a pair of enormous wings, and take flight as you advance,
and not pass you quietly by, as he soon will, nodding his head in his
old familiar style, and jingling his bells. While the mind is fresh,
there is nothing which does not excite some transitory pleasure. But
when the journey is felt to be growing long--very long--what a singular
apathy steals over us! We struggle against this encroaching torpor--we
are ashamed of it--we rouse the mind to thought, we wake the eye to
observation--all in vain. Those incessant wheels of the carriage roll
round and round, and we are rolling on as mechanically as they. The
watch, which we refrain from consulting too often, lest the interest of
its announcements should be abated, is our only friend; we look at it
with a secret hope that it may have travelled farther than we venture to
prognosticate; we proclaim that it is just two oclock, and in reality
expect that it is three, and try to cheat ourselves into an agreeable
surprise. We look, and the hands point precisely at half-past one!

What a _business-like_ looking thing, said Mildred, as she roused
herself from this unwelcome torpor, seems the earth when it is divided
into square fields, and cut into even furrows by the plough!--so
palpably a mere manufactory for grain. Oh, when shall I see it rise, and
_live_ in the mountain?

My dear Mildred, said her aunt, gently jogging her, do you know that
you are talking in your sleep?

I have been asleep, my dear aunt, or something very like it, I know;
but I thought just then I was quite awake, was Mildreds quiet reply.

When the party reached Lyons, there was some little discussion as to the
route they should take into Italy. Mildred had hoped to cross the Alps,
and this had been their original intention; but the easy transit down
the river, by the steam-boat, to Avignon, was a temptation which,
presenting itself after the fatigues of his long journey from Paris, was
irresistible to Mr. Bloomfield. He determined, therefore, to proceed
into Italy by way of Marseilles, promising his niece that she should
cross the Alps, and pass through Switzerland on their return home.

Accordingly, they embarked in the steamer. Here Mr. Bloomfield was more
at his ease. One circumstance, however, occasioned him a little alarm.
He was watching, with some curiosity, the movements of two men who were
sounding the river, with long poles, on either side of the vessel. The
reason of this manuvre never distinctly occurred to him, till he heard
the bottom of the boat grating on the bed of the river. No danger!
cried the man at the helm, who caught Mr. Bloomfields eye, as he looked
round with some trepidation. No danger! muttered Mr. Bloomfield. No
danger, perhaps, of being drowned; but the risk of being stuck here fast
in the midst of this river for four-and-twenty hours, is danger enough.
After this, he watched the motions of these men with their long poles
with less curiosity, indeed, but redoubled interest.

It was in vain, however, that he endeavoured to communicate his alarm to
Mildred, who contented herself with hoping, that if the boat really
meant to stop, it would take up a good position, and where the view was
finest. With her the day passed delightfully. The views on the Rhone,
though not equal to those of the Rhine, form no bad introduction to the
higher order of scenery; and she marked this day in her calendar as the
first of a series which she hoped would be very long, of days spent in
that highest and purest excitement which the sublimities of nature
procure for us. On the Rhine, the hills rise from the banks of the
river, and enclose it, giving to the winding stream, at some of its most
celebrated points of view, the appearance of a lake. It is otherwise on
the Rhone. The heights are ruder, grander, but more distant; they
appertain less to the river; they present bold and open views, but lack
that charm of _tenderness_ which hangs over the German stream. In some
parts, a high barren rock rises precipitately from the banks, and, the
surface having been worn away in great recesses, our party was struck
with the fantastic resemblance these occasionally bore to a series of
vast architectural ruins. A beautiful sunset, in which the old broken
bridge, with its little watch-tower, displayed itself to great
advantage, welcomed them to Avignon.

Again, from Avignon to Marseilles, their route lay through a very
picturesque country. One peculiarity struck Mildred: they were not so
much _hills_ which rose before and around her, as lofty rocks which had
been built up upon the plain--abrupt, precipitous, isolated--such as
seem more properly to belong to the bottom of the sea than to the
otherwise level surface over which they were passing. As their most
expeditious conveyance, and in order to run no risk of the loss of the
packet, our travellers performed this stage in the _diligence_, and
Mildred was not a little amused by the opportunity this afforded of
observing her fellow-passengers. It is singular how much accustomed we
are to regard all Frenchmen as under one type; forgetting that every
nation contains all varieties of character within itself, however much
certain qualities may predominate. Amongst her travelling companions was
an artist, _not_ conceited, and neither a coxcomb nor an abominable
sloven, but natural in his manners, and, as the little incident we shall
have occasion to mention will prove, somewhat energetic in his
movements. In the corner opposite to him sat a rather elderly gentleman,
travelling probably in some mercantile capacity, of an almost infantine
simplicity of mind, and the most peaceable temperament in the world; but
who combined with these pacific qualities the most unceasing
watchfulness after his own little interests, his own comfort and
convenience. The manner in which he cherished himself was quite amusing;
and admirable was the ingenuity and perseverance he displayed in this
object; for whilst quietly resolved to have his own way in every thing,
he was equally resolved to enter into collision with no one. He was
averse to much air, and many were the manuvres that he played off upon
the artist opposite, and on the controller of the other window, that he
might get them both arranged according to the idea which he had formed
of perfect comfort. Then, in the disposition of his legs, whilst he
seemed desirous only of accommodating his young friend opposite, he so
managed matters as to have his own limbs very comfortably extended,
while those of his young friend were cramped up no one could say
where. It greatly facilitated these latter manuvres, that our elderly
gentleman wore large wooden shoes, painted black. No one could tread on
_his_ toes.

Sedulous as he was to protect himself against all the inconveniencies of
the road, he seemed to have no desire to monopolize the knowledge he
possessed requisite to this end, but, on the contrary, was quite willing
to communicate the results of his travelling experience. He particularly
enlarged on the essential services rendered to him by these very wooden
shoes--how well they protected him from the wet--how well from external
pressure! He was most instructive also and exact upon the sort of
garments one should travel in--not too good, for travel spoils them--not
too much worn, or too slight, for in that case they will succumb under
the novel hardships imposed upon them. Pointing to his own coat, he
showed how well it illustrated his principles, and bade the company
observe of what a stout and somewhat coarse material it was fabricated.
Warming upon his subject, he proceeded to give them an inventory of all
the articles of dress he carried with him in his portmanteau--how many
coats, shirts, pantaloons, &c. &c. All this he gave out in a manner the
most urbane and precise, filling up his pauses with a short dry cough,
which had nothing to do with any pulmonary affection, but was merely an
oratorical artifice--a modest plan of his own for drawing the attention
of his hearers.

Unfortunately he had not long succeeded in arranging matters to his
perfect satisfaction, when a little accident robbed him of the fruit of
all his labours. The artist, in his energetic manner of speaking, and
forgetting that he had been induced by the soft persuasions of his
neighbour to put up the window (an act which he had been led into almost
unconsciously) thrust his elbow through the glass. Great was the
consternation of our elderly traveller, and yet it was in the gentlest
tone imaginable that he suggested to the artist the propriety, the
absolute necessity, that he should get the window mended at the next
place where they would stop to change horses. Mended the window
accordingly was. When the new glass was in, and paid for, and they had
started again upon their journey, _then_ the friendly old gentleman
placed all his sympathies at the command of the young artist. He was of
opinion that he had been greatly overcharged for the window--that he had
paid twice as much as he ought. Nay, he doubted whether he ought to have
paid any thing at all--whether he could be said to have broken the
window--for, as he now began to remember, he thought _it was cracked
before_.

Mildred could hardly refrain from a hearty laugh at what she found to be
as amusing as a comedy.

First the town of Aix, then that of Marseilles, received our travellers.
Of Aix, Mildred carried away one impression only. As they entered into
the town with all the rattling vehemence which distinguishes the
diligence on such occasions, there stood before her an enormous
crucifix, a colossal, representation of the Passion; and underneath it a
company of showmen, buffoons of some description, had established their
stage, and were beating their drums, as French showmen can alone beat
them, and calling the crowd together with all manner of noise and
gesticulation. Strange juxtaposition! thought Mildred--the crucifix and
the mountebank! But not the fault of the mountebank.

What execrable taste is this which the Catholic clergy display! That
which is fit only for the sanctuary--if fit at all for the eye of man,
or for solitary and desolate spots--is thrust into streets and
market-places, there to meet with a perpetual desecration. That which
harmonizes with one mood only, the most sad and solemn of the human
mind, is dragged out into the public square, where every part of life,
all its comedy and all its farce, is necessarily transacted. If the most
revolting contrasts occur--no, it is not the fault of the profane
mountebank.

Marseilles, with all its dirt and fragrance, left almost as little
impression upon her mind. The only remembrance that outlived the day was
that of the peculiar dignity which seemed to have been conferred upon
the market-women of the town. At other places, especially at Brussels,
our party had been not a little amused by inspecting the countenances of
the old women who sat, thick as their own apples, round the _Grand
Place_, or on both sides of the street. What formidable physiognomies!
What preternatural length of nose! What terrific projection of chin! But
these sat upon the pavement, or on an upturned wicker basket; a stool or
a low chair that had suffered amputation in the legs, was the utmost
they aspired to. Here the market-women have not only possessed
themselves of huge arm-chairs, but these arm-chairs are elevated upon
the broad wooden tables that are covered with the cabbages, and carrots,
and turnips, over which they thus magisterially preside. Here they have
the curule chair. Manifestly they are the _diles Cereales_ of the town.
Our travellers did not, however, see them in their glory; they saw only
down the centre of the street the row of elevated chairs, which, if
originally of ivory, had certainly lost much of their brightness and
polish since the time when the Roman Senate had presented them. The
Court was not sitting as they passed.

The following day saw them in the steam-boat bound for Genoa. In a few
hours they would be coasting the shores of Italy!

We cannot resist the opportunity which here occurs of showing, by an
example, how justly our Mildred may be said to have been a solitary
traveller, though in almost constant companionship. She was alone in
spirit, and her thoughts were unparticipated. The steam-boat had been
advertised to leave Marseilles at four oclock in the afternoon. The
clock had struck six, and it was still stationary in the harbour,--a
delay by no means unusual with steam-boats in that part of the world.
Mildred stood on the deck, by the side of the vessel, watching the
movements of the various craft in the harbour. To her the delays which
so often vex the traveller rarely gave rise to any impatience. She
always found something to occupy her mind; and the passing to and fro of
men in their usual avocations was sufficient to awaken her reflection.
At a little distance from the steamer was a vessel undergoing some
repairs; for which purpose it was ballasted down, and made to float
nearly on one side. Against the exposed side of the vessel, astride upon
a plank, suspended by a rope, swung a bare-legged mortal most raggedly
attired, daubing its seams with some most disgusting-looking compound.
The man swinging in this ignominious fashion, and immersed in the filth
of his operation, attracted the notice of Mildred. What an application,
thought she, to make of a man! This fellow-creature of mine, they use
him for this! and perhaps for such as this only! They use his legs and
arms--which are sufficiently developed--but where is the rest of
him?--where is the man? He has the same _humanity_ as the noblest of us:
what a waste of the stuff, if it is worth any thing!

This last expression Mildred, almost unconsciously, uttered
aloud,--What a waste of the stuff, if it is worth any thing!

My dear, said Miss Bloomfield, who sat beside her, it is nothing but
the commonest pitch or tar. How can you bear to look at it?

Dearest aunt, said Mildred, I was not thinking of the pitch, but the
man.

What _can_ you be talking of, my child? said her aunt, in utter
amazement.

But there was one behind them who appeared to have understood what
Mildred was talking of, and who now, by some observation, made his
presence known to them. As she turned, she caught the eye of--Alfred
Winston.

They met this time as old acquaintances; and that glance of intellectual
freemasonry which was interchanged between them, tended not a little to
increase their feeling of intimacy.

And you too are going into Italy? she said. But how is it that _you_
select this route?

I made an excursion, he replied, last summer into Switzerland and the
north of Italy, which accounts for my _turning_ the Alps on this
occasion.

The vessel now weighed anchor. Departure--and a beautiful sunset--made
the view delightful. But daylight soon deserted them. Mr. Bloomfield
came to take the ladies down to the cabin, where a meal, which might be
called either dinner or supper, was preparing. Mildred would rather have
remained on deck; but as _he_ had expressed his intention of doing so,
she thought it better to descend with the rest.

Amongst the company in the cabin she immediately recognised one of her
fellow-travellers of the previous day. There was the elderly gentleman
with his black wooden shoes, and his short dry cough, gently but
strenuously chiding the _garon_ for his delay. In these vessels the
passage-money includes provisions, so that, eat or not, you pay; and our
experienced traveller, having taken due precaution, as he soon
afterwards informed all the company, _not_ to dine, was very excusably
somewhat impatient. Mildred was amused to find him supporting his
character throughout with perfect consistency. Although every one but
himself was suffering from heat, he--anxious only for the public good,
and especially for the comfort of the ladies--maintained a strict watch
upon both door and, window, and would have kept both, if possible,
hermetically closed. And as the waiters handed round the soup, or any
thing that was, fluid, he, with a mild solemnity of manner, warned them
not to _arroser_ his coat, not to sprinkle that excellent garment which
was doubtless destined, under so considerate a master, to see many years
of service.


CHAPTER V.

The next morning Mildred had risen with the dawn, leaving her aunt and
the rest of the passengers locked in their slumbers. What a delightful
sensation awaited her as she rose from the close cabin of the steamer,
and, ascending upon deck, met the breeze, the sunrise, the dancing
waters of the Mediterranean, and hailed at her side the mountain coast
of Italy! It was the first time in her life she had seen the blue hill
crested with the snowy summits of the more distant and lofty
mountain,--a combination which the art of the painter is daily
attempting to imitate, but the etherial effect of which it never can at
all approach. What an enchantment is the first view of the greater
beauties of nature! The first lake--the first mountain--the first time
we behold the eternal snow, white as the summer cloud, but which passes
_not_ away--is an era in our existence,--a first love without its
disappointment. The inhabitant of a mountainous country, though he may
boast his greater intimacy with nature, though he may have linked all
the feelings of _home_ with her grandeur and sublimity, can never know
what the dweller in the plain and the city has felt, who, with matured
taste, with imagination cultivated by literature, stands, in all the
vigour of his mind, for the first time before the mountain! It was but a
distant view of the Alps that Mildred now obtained; but that snowy ridge
against the blue sky--that moved not, that was not cloud--exercised an
indescribable fascination over her.

Winston was also soon upon deck; but, observing how well she was
employed, he was careful not to disturb her. He well knew how essential
was solitude to the highest gratification which either art or nature
afford. It is but a secondary or declining excitement that we feel when
we are restless to communicate it to another. The heart is but half
full of its object, that, to complete its pleasure, craves for sympathy.

It was not till they were within sight of Genoa that he ventured to
approach the side of the vessel where she was sitting.

Now, said he, with a smile, it is permissible to talk. We approach
the shore too near for picturesque effect; and the town of Genoa, seen
here from the bay, whatever tourists may assert, is neither more nor
less than what a sea-port town may be expected to be.

Yes, said Mildred; I was just observing to myself that a hilly coast,
delightful to him who is on it, and delightful to the distant spectator,
is at a certain mid-way station seen to great disadvantage. It has lost
the cerulean hue--that _colour laid in the air_--that visible poetry
which it had appropriated to itself; it has lost this enchantment of
distance, and it is still too remote for the natural beauty of its
several objects to be perceived. These are dwarfed and flattened. The
trees are bushes, mere tufts of green; the precipices and cliffs are
patches of gravel darker or lighter. For the charm of imagination it is
too near; for the effect of its own realities, too remote. And yet--and
yet--see what a _life_ is thrown over the scene by the shadow of that
passing cloud, moving rapidly over the little fields, and houses, and
the olive groves! How it _brightens_ all, by the contrast it forms with
the stream of light which follows as rapidly behind it! I retract--I
retract--Nature has a pencil which never is at fault; which has always
some touch in reserve to kindle every scene into beauty.

But the town----

Oh, I surrender the town. Certainly, if this is the view which tourists
admire, they shall never have the moulding of my anticipations. The sail
by the coast has been delightful; but it is precisely here, in presence
of this congregation of ordinary buildings, that the pleasure deserts
us.

People, said Winston, have described Genoa the Proud as if its
palaces stood by the sea. They have combined, I suspect, in one view all
that the exterior and the interior of the town had presented to them.
They have taken the little privilege of turning the city inside out;
just as if one should make up a picture of the approach to London by the
river Thames, by lining its banks with sections cut out of Regents
Park. But here we are at anchor, and shall soon be able to penetrate
into this city of palaces.

They landed, and Alfred Winston assisted the ladies to disembark, but
showed no symptoms of any intention to attach himself to their party. He
did not even select the same hotel. But as all travellers are seeing the
same sights, visiting the same churches, the same palaces, the same
points of view, it was not possible for them to be long without meeting.
And these casual encounters seemed to afford to both parties an equal
pleasure.

We have seen that there was a strain of thought in Mildreds mind, which
found neither sympathy nor apprehension with her companions. Mr.
Bloomfield was, indeed, more intelligent than his sister; but his
half-perceptions, coupled unfortunately with no distrust whatever of
himself, made him the more tedious companion of the two; for he would
either inflict upon her some misplaced flippancy, or some wearisome
common-place; which last he doubted not was extremely edifying to his
niece. Good man! he little suspected that the great difference between
himself and his niece consisted in this, that he was indeed incapable of
receiving any edification from her; whilst she, in her own silent way,
would often extract from the chaff he dealt in, some truth for herself.
Her responsive Yes, was, often yielded in assent to a meaning other
and higher than he was aware he had expressed. To her, therefore, the
intellectual sympathy which she found in their fellow-traveller was
peculiarly grateful; it was as novel as it was agreeable.

If she had refused to be pleased with the applauded view of the bay of
Genoa, she was unfeignedly interested in the interior of the town. Nor,
perhaps, is there any town in Italy, with the exception of Venice, which
makes a more striking impression upon the traveller. He walks through a
street of palaces, the painted fronts of many of which remind him of the
scenes of the theatre--so that he can hardly believe himself to be in a
real town; he sees the orange-tree upon the terrace above him, and its
veritable golden fruit hangs over his head--is hanging in the open air:
he feels he is now really in Italy! he sees the light arcade running by
the side of the palace, with its decorated arch, its statues, its vases;
and as he passes along the street, the open portico partly reveals the
branching staircase, and the inner court, with its deserted galleries,
and its now so solitary fountain. And as he walks on--in striking
contrast--narrow, very narrow streets, at his right or at his left,
descend upon him, dark and precipitous as a mountain gorge, bringing
down the clattering mule, laden ingeniously enough with whatever is
elsewhere stowed into a cart, or the antique sedan, the only vehicle in
which a living man could navigate those straits. Then the multitude of
priests and friars, black and brown--the white muslin veil thrown over
the heads of the women, or the gaudy scarf of printed cotton substituted
by the poorer sort (Miss Bloomfield exclaimed, and very naturally, that
they had got their bed furniture about their ears)--all this, and much
more, which it is not exactly our purpose to describe, give to the town
an air of complete originality. The very decay, in some parts, of its
antique state and grandeur, adds to its interest. One looks into the
deserted porch, deserted of all but that sleepy shoe-black, who has
installed himself in its shade with the necessary implements of his
calling; and one sees the fountain still bubbling up, still playing
there before its only companion, that stained and mutilated statue, who
looks on with how pensive, how altered, how deploring an aspect!

The young priests, with their broad hats and well draped vests of
spotless black cloth, Mildred thought the best dressed men she had any
where seen. The finished dandy looks contemptible by the side of these.
She could not pass the same compliment on the brown friar, corded and
sandeled, with his low brow and his bare shaven crown. In vain does he
proclaim that his poverty is voluntary, and most meritorious: he has a
sad, plebeian aspect; and even his saintly brother in black manifestly
looks down upon him, as they meet upon the pavement, as belonging to the
democracy of their sacred order. Voluntary poverty! the faith in the
existence of such a thing is rarer even than the thing itself; it is
worn out; and in this age a mendicant friar can be nothing more than a
legalised beggar, earning his subsistence (as the Church, we suppose,
would explain it) by the useful office of stimulating the charity of
men; there being in the natural constitution of society so few occasions
for the practice of benevolence.

Our fellow-travellers had met in the church of the _Annunciation_, one
of the most gorgeous structures which the Catholic religion has erected
for its worship. It would be almost impossible for gilding, and
painting, and all the decorative arts, to produce any thing more
splendid than the interior of this temple. Neither Versailles nor Rome
has any thing to compete with the sumptuous effect which is here
produced by these means. By drawing a red silk curtain across the upper
windows, there is thrown over the gilding so rich a hue, that the roof
and pillars glow as if with molten gold. High up, within the dome, there
stand, in pairs, one at each side of every window, gilded statues; and
these, in the red light thrown upon them, look as if invested with
flame. They reminded Mildred of some description she had read in
Southeys _Curse of Kehama_.

Winston was disposed to quarrel with the building as being too gorgeous;
but Mildred, who resigned herself more readily to genuine and natural
impulses of pleasure, and who at all times expressed the unaffected
dictates of her taste, would not acquiesce in any censure of the kind.

No, she maintained, if the artist aim at being gorgeous, he must stop
at no half measures. There is a higher aim, no doubt, where form and
proportion ought more strictly to predominate over colour, and all the
splendour of marble and of gilding. But if he is resolved to dazzle
us--if to be sumptuous is his very object, let him throw timidity to the
winds; let him build--as he has done here--in gold; let him paint--as on
this ceiling--in such glowing colours as even this roof of flame cannot
overpower. Look up the dome; see how these clouds are rolling down upon
us!

But, said Winston, still disposed to be critical, there is something
else in that dome which seems disposed to fall; and which, from its
nature, ought to manifest no such tendency. Do you remark those small
Corinthian pillars placed round the upper part of the dome--how they
lean inward? A pillar is the last thing which ought to look as if it
needed support; yet these evidently, unless fastened to the wall, would,
by their own gravity, fall down upon us. This is surely contrary to the
simplest rules of taste, yet it is not the first time I have observed in
Italy this species of ornament.

I acquiesce in your criticism, said Mildred, with a smile; now point
me out something to admire.

They sat down quietly on one of the benches, placed there for the
service of the faithful, to survey at leisure this sumptuous edifice,
and let its impression sink into their memory. But this pleasure was not
a little interrupted by the devotees in their neighbourhood--dirty,
ragged, squalid men and women, mumbling and spitting--spitting and
mumbling. They were unreasonable enough to feel that the devotion of
these people was quite an intrusive circumstance. For such
worshippers!--such a temple!--thought Mildred. They were jabbering their
prayers, like idiocy, behind her. Let us move away, she whispered.
After all, said Winston, as they retired, it is for their idiocy, and
not our admiration, that the temple is built.

On leaving this building they directed their steps towards the suburbs
of the town, and entered a church which, in its modest appearance,
formed a strong contrast with the one they had just visited. A level
space before it, planted with trees, gave it the air of an English
parish church. Neither the interior nor the exterior presented any
architectural display. Whilst Mr. and Miss Bloomfield were walking up to
the altar, and taking, as in duty bound, a survey of the whole building,
Mildred and her companion lingered near the entrance, attracted by some
monumental tablets set up against the walls. The bas-reliefs on one, or
two of these were remarkable for their beauty, their elegance and
tenderness, and the inscriptions accorded with them, and seemed full of
feeling.

I am glad, she said, we happened to enter here. I was beginning to be
a little out of humour with my catholic brethren; but these tablets
bring me back to a charitable and kindly mood.

Winston joined her in reading some of the inscriptions.

It is really, said he, the first time I can remember to have been
affected by monumental inscriptions, or to have read them with any
pleasure or patience. In an English churchyard, the tombstone either
_preaches_ at you--and that with such an offensive dogmatism as none but
a dead man would venture to assume--or it presents a fulsome collection
of laudatory phrases, shovelled upon the dead with as much thought and
consideration as were the dirt and clay upon his coffin. If verse is
added, it seems to have been supplied, with the stone, by the
stone-mason; the countrymen of Milton--and not alone the poor and
ignorant--select, to be engraved on the enduring marble, some pitiable
doggerel that ought never to have been heard beyond the nursery, so that
few persons stop to read the epitaphs in our churchyards, unless in a
spirit of mockery, and with the hope of extracting a jest from them.

For which reason, amongst others, said Mildred, I generally avoid
them. I would respect the dead,--and the living in their affliction. But
what a natural, humane, tender, and faithful spirit are some of these
written in! And this beautiful figure of a young girl ascending to the
skies, embracing the cross in her arms,--what a sweet piety it breathes!
How well it bears out the inscription underneath, the _conceit_ in which
might otherwise have at least failed to please,--

     fatta in cielo quale parve in terra
               --un angelo.

And here--how full of tenderness--how full of faith--seem these simple
words!--

    Qu dorme in pace
    la gentile e virtuosa giovine Maria, &c.
    Voleva all amplesso di Dio.

And this,--

      O Ginevra,
    Unico nostro tesoro!
    Arridi a noi dal cielo
      cara angioletta,
      e ne prega da Dio
    novella prole che ti somigli,
    a rendere meno acerbo,
    il dolore della tua partita.

Earth and Heaven--how they mingle here!

Is it poetry or religion that we are reading? said Winston. It seems
to me as if these people had suddenly turned their poetry into faith.

Or have some of us been turning our faith into poetry? I believe,
added Mildred, that, in every mind, not utterly destitute of
imagination, the boundaries of the two are not very rigidly defined.
There is always something of faith in our poetry, and something of
poetry in our faith.

They were now joined by Mr. and Miss Bloomfield, who had made their tour
of the church; and the whole party retraced their steps towards their
hotel. Winston felt that he had not once indulged Mr. Bloomfield in an
opportunity of venting his lamentations over the evils of travel, and
the discomforts of foreign parts; he therefore asked that gentleman how
he had found himself accommodated at the hotel at which he had
descended.

Ay, said Mr. Bloomfield, delighted to have a topic on which he could
feelingly expatiate, _Descended!_--tis the Frenchmans phrase. I know
that I have _ascended_ to my hotel, and to no trivial elevation. Why,
the hotel itself does not begin till where another house might end, and
where it ends might be a problem for astronomers to calculate. The
ladies got deposited somewhere beneath the clouds; but for myself I am
really at a frightful altitude. I was conducted up a dark
stone-staircase with an iron-bannister; after some time my guide
branched off laterally through by-passages, with unglazed openings,
having the most cheerless look-out imaginable, and across damp
landing-places contiguous to sinks, and what seemed wash-houses, and
where you heard the perpetual dripping of water. All this lay in the
road to my bed-room; but the bed-room was not reached yet. I had again
to mount--to mount--till I was almost giddy. When at length I attained
the apartment destined for me--the only one, I was assured, vacant in
the hotel--and was left up there alone in it, I felt so removed from all
human fellowship, all succour or sympathy from the inhabitants of the
earth below, that I do declare, if I had not been a little initiated on
the journey--if I had come direct from my English home at Wimborne--and
if, moreover, I was not here in character of protector to two ladies,
and therefore bound to carry a bold face in all extremities--I do
declare that I should have thrown myself down in utter despair upon the
floor, and there lay till the undertaker should come and take me down
again!--it seemed the only mode of descent that was at all practicable.

Certainly it would be the easiest and the safest, said Winston,
humouring his vein of exaggeration. And yet it is hardly upon the
_floor_ that you would have thrown yourself--which being probably of
painted tiles, would have given you a cruel reception. You would rather
have chosen Captain Shandys attitude, when he was overwhelmed with
grief, and flung yourself face foremost upon the bed.

Very true. And as to that same bed, whether owing to the fatigue of my
toilsome ascent, or to some good properties of its own, I must confess I
never slept on any thing more agreeable. Yet, on examination, I found it
stuffed with the dried leaves of the Indian corn. Strange substitute for
a feather bed! It is inconceivable how comfortable I found it. And to be
the dried leaves of Indian corn--a sort of straw, in short. And the next
morning when I woke, and saw by daylight the light and elegant drapery
of my bed, and looked up at the gaily painted ceiling--I suppose in this
country the pigeon-houses have their ceilings painted--I could hardly
believe that I was in an attic--raised even to the fifth power of an
attic.

When Alfred Winston mounted to _his attic_ that night--as Mr. Bloomfield
persisted in calling every elevated dormitory--he ought, if fatigue was
sufficient to ensure it, to have slept soundly too. But he did not. He
did not sleep at all. And the result of this sleepless night was a
resolution, which does not seem strictly consequent thereon,--a
resolution to rise with the dawn, and leave Genoa immediately.

The fact was, that this Mildred Willoughby was exercising over him, not,
as is often said, a fascination for which he could not account, but
one for which he could account too well. She realized all that he had
ever pictured to himself of feminine charms,--his ideal of
woman,--grace, beauty, tenderness, and a mind highly cultivated. But he
had not come to Italy to fall in love. Besides, what had he, in Italy or
elsewhere, to do with love? It was a thing out of his calculation at all
times and places, and just now more than ever. How could he see
Italy--see any thing--with this Mildred by the side of him? He would
escape from this dangerous party. It was their intention, he had heard,
to proceed to Pisa; he would start at once to Florence, and visit Pisa
on his return. By this means he should get the start of them, and he
would keep it.

By eight oclock that morning he was travelling on the road to Florence.

The Bloomfields were a little surprised at not encountering their
agreeable companion again; and at length concluded that he had taken his
departure. Rather abruptly, to be sure, yet what claim had either on the
other to any of the ceremonies of social intercourse? They were mere
travellers, whom hazard had thrown together.

After all, said Mr. Bloomfield; we have never been introduced.

Very true, said Miss Bloomfield, that never struck me.

Mildred was silent.




CHAPTER VI.


Winston so far succeeded in his design, that by hastening from Genoa,
and leaving Pisa unvisited, he was enabled to view the galleries of
Florence without being disturbed by any other beauty than that which
looked on him from the walls, or lived in the creations of the sculptor.
From Florence he had proceeded to Rome, and had surveyed its antiquities
and the marvels of art it contained, still undistracted by the too
fascinating Mildred.

But although he had secured his solitude from interruption by a person
likely to interest him too keenly, he was not equally resolute, or
equally successful, in keeping himself aloof from certain
fellow-travellers with whom he had scarce one thought or one taste in
common. Our readers may remember a young lady whom we attempted to
describe, figuring not very advantageously at the ball-room at Brussels.
This damsel belonged to a mamma who, in her own way, was a still greater
oddity, and who, indeed, ought to be made responsible for the grotesque
appearance of her daughter on that occasion. She insisted upon it that,
as all the world knew they were travellers, just looking in, as it were,
as they were passing through the town, they might very well go to the
ball in their travelling dresses; and as she was one of those who held
rigidly to the prudent maxim that any thing was good enough to travel
in, these dresses were not likely, be the occasion what it might, to be
remarkable for their freshness.

Mrs. Jackson was the widow of a citizen of London who had lately died,
leaving her and her daughter a very ample fortune. Now, although Mr.
Jackson had, ever since his marriage, been adding hundred to hundred by
the sale of wax and tallow candles in the city, yet had he continued to
inhabit the same little house at Islington into which he had first
packed himself with dear Mrs. Jackson immediately after the honeymoon;
nor had he, in any one way, made an effort to enjoy his increasing
income. An effort it would have been. What more did Mr. Jackson want?
What more _could_ he have enjoyed? The morning took him to his warehouse
in the city, and the afternoon brought him back with an excellent
appetite for an excellent dinner, and quite sufficiently fatigued to
enjoy that comfortable digestive nap, in which Mrs. Jackson also joined
him; and from which he woke up only the better prepared for the hearty
slumbers of the night. His wealth, had he been obliged to spend it,
would have added to his discomfort, instead of diffusing over him, as it
did, a perpetual pleasant glow of self-importance. A larger and finer
house, with the toil of receiving company in it, would have distressed
him beyond measure. It was bad enough to be compelled, occasionally, to
take his spouse to the theatre, or to a Christmas party: such
enterprises were looked forward to with uneasy apprehension; and the
gratification of having _got over_ them was the only one they afforded
him. His ledger--his newspaper--his dinner and a fireside, quiet but not
solitary, this was the summary of his happiness. His little wine-glass,
as Boswell would have expressed it, was quite full; you would only have
made a mess of it, and spoilt all, by attempting to pour in a whole
tumbler-full of happiness.

One daughter only had blessed the nuptials of Mr. and Mrs. Jackson. She
was still at boarding-school when her father died. But, after this
event, her fond mamma could no longer bear the separation; and home she
came, bringing with her that accurate and complete stock of human
knowledge and female accomplishments which is usually derived from such
establishments, namely, infinite scraps of every thing and every thing
in scraps, with the beginning of all languages, of all arts, and all
sciences. There was in her portfolio a map of China, faithfully
delineated, and a group of roses not quite so faithful. She had strummed
one sonata till she played it with all the certainty of animal instinct,
and she had acquired the capability of saying, How dye do? in at
least three several languages beside the English.

But the loss of Jackson even the society of the accomplished Louisa
could not compensate. The widow was very dull. Her comfortable house at
Islington ceased to bring comfort to her; and she was tormented by a
most unusual restlessness. Her daughter, who had heard from her
favourite companion at the boarding-school, of the charms of foreign
travel,--of the romantic adventures, and the handsome counts and barons
that are sure to be encountered on the road, took advantage of this
restlessness to persuade her mamma to take a tour on the Continent.
After much discussion, much hesitation, infinite talking, and reading of
guide-books, and exploring of maps--they started.

Absurd!--impossible!--exclaims the intelligent reader--that good Mrs.
Jackson should commit herself and her daughter to all the casualties of
travel without a male companion. And for what purpose? What pleasure
could rocks and mountains, or statues and pictures, give to her, that
would be worth the trouble of getting to them? Very absurd and quite
impossible! we ourselves should, perhaps, have exclaimed, had we been
inventing incidents, and not recording a mere sober matter of fact. But
so it was. And, indeed, let any one call to mind the strange groups he
has encountered--scrambling about the Continent, the Lord knows why or
wherefore--and whatever difficulty he may have in explaining Mrs.
Jacksons motives, he will have none in believing her conduct, were it
twice as absurd. Of pleasure, indeed, she had little, and very much
tribulation. To be sure she felt quite at home upon the steam-boat on
the Rhine;--it did so remind her of a trip she once took to Greenwich
with the dear departed. And then it was very amusing and instructive to
both herself and her daughter to find out all the places as they passed
on that Panorama of the Rhine which lay extended on their laps before
them. Being on the spot, they could study the map with singular
advantage. But it was not always they had a map of the country to look
at, nor even anyone to tell them the names of the places. The idea of
seeing a place and not knowing its name!--this always put Mrs. Jackson
in a perfect fever: as well, she would say, shake hands with the Lord
Mayor, and not know it _was_ the Lord Mayor! And then what she suffered
who can tell, from the strange outlandish viands put before, and alas!
too often put within her? and that daily affliction--imposed on her
with such unnecessary cruelty--of eating her meat without vegetables, or
her vegetables without meat?

Still on she went--bustling, elbowing, sighing, scolding,
complaining--but nevertheless travelling on. Being at Rome, in the same
hotel with Winston, and finding that he had answered one or two of her
questions very civilly and satisfactorily, both she and her daughter had
frequently applied to him in their difficulties. And these difficulties
generally resulted from a lack of knowledge so easily supplied, that it
would have been mere churlishness to withhold the necessary information.

These difficulties, however, seemed to increase rather than diminish
with their sojourn at Rome; and well they might. Louisa Jackson found
them the most convenient things imaginable. She had been all the way on
the look-out for adventures, counts, and barons, and had hitherto met
with nothing of the sort. But Alfred Winston was as handsome as any
count need be--why not fall in love with him? A gentleman she was
convinced he was; of wealth she had sufficient, and to do her justice,
had quite generosity enough to be indifferent as to his possessions; and
for the rest, she would let her eye, let her heart, choose for her. The
brave Louisa! And her eye and her heart--which mean here pretty much the
same thing--had made no bad selection. As she had mentally resolved to
bestow herself, and all her stocks, funds, and securities, upon our
hero, and as she had wit enough to see that her only hold upon him at
present, was through his compassion for their embarrassments, she was
determined to keep an ample supply of them on hand.

They came sometimes without being called for, and without the least
collusion on her part. It was from no principle of economy, but from a
curiosity which could not be gratified so well in any other manner, that
Mrs. Jackson and her daughter occasionally ventured to thread their way
on foot through the streets of Rome. On one of these expeditions they
found themselves in the neighbourhood of the Pantheon. Opposite this
building there is a sort of ambulatory market, outrivalling all other
markets, at least in the commodity of noise--a commodity in which the
populace of Rome generally abound. On approaching it you think some
desperate affray is going on; but the men are only parading and vaunting
their disgusting fish, or most uninviting vegetables. The merits of
these they proclaim with a perfect storm of vociferation. Mrs. Jackson,
who had heard of revolutions on the Continent, did not doubt for a
moment but that one of these frightful things was taking place before
her. She and her daughter hurried back with precipitation, haunted by
all the terrors of the guillotine and the lamp-post. Louisa remembered a
certain beautiful princess she had read of, who had been compelled to
drink a cup of blood to save her father. What if they should treat her
as they did the beautiful princess, and offer her such another cup, and
force her to drink it, as the only means of saving her mother? Her
heroism did not desert her. She resolved she would _drink half_. But as
they were hurrying away full of these imaginary dangers, they rushed
upon one of a more real though less imposing description. It is no joke
in the narrow streets of Rome, to meet with a string of carts drawn by
huge oxen, wallowing along under their uneasy yokes. Just such a string
of carts encountered them as they turned one of the many narrow streets
that conduct to the Pantheon. The enormous brutes went poking their
spreading horns this way and that, in a manner very quiet perhaps in the
animals apprehensions, but very alarming to those of Mrs. Jackson; huge
horns, that were large enough, she thought, to spit an alderman, and
still have, room for her at the top. The two ladies, seeing the first of
these carts approach, had drawn-up close against the wall, and placed
themselves on a little heap of rubbish to be more completely out of the
way. To their dismay the line of these vehicles seemed to be
endless--there was no escape--in that position they had to stand, while
each brute as he passed turned his horns round to them, not with any
ferocious intention, but as if he had a great curiosity to feel them,
and examine their texture--an attention which would have been highly
indecorous, to say the least of it.

What could Winston do, who encountered them in this predicament, but
offer his escort? He calmed their various terrors--both of mad bulls and
of revolutions--reconducted them to the Pantheon, and secured an
exceedingly happy day for one at least of the party.

Winston had now been some time in Rome, and with an inconsistency so
natural that it hardly merits the name of inconsistency, he found
himself looking about in the galleries and churches for Mr. Bloomfield
and his party, and with a curiosity which did not bespeak a very violent
determination to avoid them. He began to think that they had lingered a
long while at Florence. He had forgot the danger--he remembered the
charm.

One morning--having stolen out early and alone from his hotel--as he was
engaged in viewing, for perhaps the last time, the sculpture of the
Vatican, he observed standing before the statue of the Amazon, a female
figure, as beautiful as it, and in an attitude which had been
unconsciously moulded into some resemblance of the pensive, queen-like
posture which the artist has given to the marble. It was Mildred. He
hesitated--he approached. She, on her part, met him with the utmost
frankness. His half-uttered apologies were immediately dropped. He
hardly knew whether to be pleased or mortified, as she made him feel
that the peculiar footing on which they stood tasked him to no
apologies, no ceremonial, that he was free to go--and withal very
welcome to return.

You are before the Amazon, said he: it is the statue of all others
which has most fascinated me. I cannot understand why it should bear the
name it does. I suppose the learned in these matters have their reasons:
I have never inquired, nor feel disposed to inquire into them; but I am
sure the character of the statue is not Amazonian. That attitude--the
right arm raised to draw aside her veil, the left hand at its elbow,
steadying it--that beautiful countenance, so full of sadness and of
dignity--no, these cannot belong to an Amazon.

To a woman, said Mildred, it is allowed to be indifferent on certain
points of learning; and, in such cases as this, I certainly take
advantage to the full of the privilege of my sex. I care not what they
call the statue. It may have been called an Amazon by Greek and
Roman--it may have been so named by the artist himself when he sent it
home to his patron: I look at it as a creation standing between me and
the mind of the artist; and sure I am that, bear what name it may, the
sculptor has embodied here all that his soul had felt of the sweetness,
and power, and dignity of woman. It is a grander creation than any
goddess I have seen; it has more of thought----

And, as a consequence, more of sadness, of unhappiness. How the mystery
of life seems to hang upon that pensive brow! I used to share an
impression, which I believe is very general, that the deep sorrow which
comes of thought, the reflective melancholy which results from pondering
on the bitter problem of life, was peculiar to the moderns. This statue,
and others which I have lately seen, have convinced me that the sculptor
of antiquity has occasionally felt and expressed whatever could be
extracted from the mingled poetry of a Byron or a Goethe.

It seems that the necessity of representing the gods in the clear light
of happiness and knowledge, in some measure deprived the Greek artist of
one great source of sublimity. But it is evident, continued Mildred,
that the mysterious, with its attendant sorrow, was known also to him.
How could it be otherwise? Oh, what a beautiful creation is this we
stand before! And what an art it is which permits us to stand thus
before a being of this high order, and note all its noble passions! From
the real life we should turn our eyes away, or drop them, abashed, upon
the ground. Here is more than life; and we may look on it by the hour,
and mark its graceful sorrow, its queen-like beauty, and this
over-mastered grief which we may wonder at, but dare not pity.

They passed on to other statues. They paused before the Menander,
sitting in his chair. The attitude, said she, is so noble, that the
simple chair becomes a throne. But still how plainly it is _intellectual
power_ that sits enthroned there! The posture is imperial; and yet how
evident, that it is the empire of thought only that he governs in!

And this little statue of Esculapius, she added, kept me a long while
before it. The healing sage--how faithfully is he represented! What a
sad benevolence! acquainted with pain--compelled to inflict even in
order to restore.

They passed through the Hall of the Muses.

How serene are _all_ the Muses! said Winston. This is as it should
be. Even Tragedy, the most moved of all, how evidently her emotion is
one of thought, not of passion! Though she holds the dagger in her
down-dropt hand, how plainly we see that she has not used it! She has
picked it up from the floor after the fatal deed was perpetrated, and is
musing on the terrible catastrophe, and the still more terrible passions
that led to it.

They passed through the _Hall of the Animals_; but this had
comparatively little attraction for Mildred. Her companion pointed out
the bronze centaur for her admiration.

You must break a centaur in half, said she, before I can admire it.
And, if I am to look at a satyr, pray let the goats legs be hid in the
bushes. I cannot embrace in one conception these fragments of man and
brute. Come with me to the neighbouring gallery; I wish to show you a
Jupiter, seated at the further end of it, which made half a Pagan of me
this morning as I stood venerating it.

The head of your Jupiter, said Winston, as they approached it, is
surpassed, I think, by more than one bust of the same god that we have
already seen; and I find something of stiffness or rigidity in the
figure; but the impression it makes, as a whole, is very grand.

It will grow wonderfully on you as you look at it, said Mildred. How
well it typifies all that a Pagan would conceive of the supreme ruler of
the skies, the controller of the powers of nature, the great
administrator of the world who has the Fates for his council! His power
irresistible, but no pride in it, no joy, no triumph. He is without
passion. In his right hand lies the thunder, but it reposes on his
thigh; and his left hand rests calmly upon his tall sceptre surmounted
by an eagle. In his countenance there is the tranquillity of
unquestioned supremacy; but there is no repose. There is care; a
constant, wakefulness. It is the governor of a nature whose elements
have never known one moments pause.

I see it as you speak, said Winston. Winston then proposed that they
should go together and look at the Apollo; but Mildred excused herself.

I have paid my devotions to the god, she said, this morning, when the
eyes and the mind were fresh. I would not willingly displace the
impression that I now carry away for one which would be made on a
fatigued and jaded attention.

Is it not godlike?

Indeed it is. I was presumptuous enough to think I knew the Apollo. A
cast of the head--esteemed to be a very good one--my uncle had given me.
I placed it in my own room; for a long time it was the first thing that
the light fell upon, or my eyes opened to, in the morning; and in my
attempts at crayons I copied it, I believe, in every aspect. It seemed
to me therefore that on visiting the Apollo I should recognise an old
acquaintance. No such thing. The cast had given me hardly any idea of
the statue itself. There was certainly no feeling of old
acquaintanceship. The brow, as I stood in front of the god, quite
overawed me; involuntarily I retreated for an instant; you will smile,
but I had to muster my courage before I could gaze steadily at it.

I am not surprised; the divinity there is in no gentle mood. How
majestic! and yet how lightly it touches the earth! It is buoyant with
godhead.

What strikes me, continued Mildred, as the great triumph of the
artist, is this very anger of the god. It is an anger, which, like the
arrow he has shot from his bow, spends itself entirely upon his victim;
there is no recoil, as in human passion, upon the mind of him who feels
it. There is no jar there. The lightning strikes _down_--it tarries not
a moment in the sky above.

We are giving, we are afraid, in these reports of Mildreds
conversation, an erroneous impression of the speaker. We collect
together what often was uttered with some pauses between, and, owing to
a partiality to our heroine, we are more anxious to report her
sentiments than those of her companion. She is thus made to speak in a
somewhat elaborate style, very different from her real manner, and
represented as rather the greater talker of the two; whereas she was
more disposed to listen than to speak, and spoke always with the
greatest simplicity--with enthusiasm, it is true, but never with effort,
or display of diction.

The delight which Winston experienced, (having already surveyed them for
and by himself,) in retracing his steps through the marvels of Rome with
such a companion, is indescribable. The pictures in the Borghese, and
other palaces, broke upon him with a second novelty, and often with a
deeper sentiment. But was there no danger in wandering through galleries
with one by his side to whose living beauty the beauty on the canvass
served only to draw renewed attention and heightened admiration? If he
fled at Genoa, why does he tarry at Rome? There are some dangers, alas!
that are seen the less the greater they become. He was standing with her
before that exquisite picture in the Borghese palace representing the
Three Ages; a youth is reclining in the centre, and a nymph is playing
to him upon two flutes. He had seen it before, but he seemed now to
understand it for the first time. How plainly, he murmured to himself,
is youth the _all_ of life! How plainly is love the _all_ of youth!

As he was now somewhat familiar with Rome, he could be serviceable to
the Bloomfield party in the capacity of cicerone. They were pleased with
his services, and he found every day some incontrovertible reason why he
should bestow them. The embarrassments of Louisa Jackson and her mamma
were quite forgotten; nor could their difficulties excite a moments
compassion or attention. In vain did Louisa sigh; no inquiry was made
into the cause of her distress. In vain did she even, with plaintive
voice, ask whether, being a Protestant, she could take the veil, and be
a nun? the question was unheeded, and its deep significance
unperceived.




EUGENE, MARLBOROUGH, FREDERICK, NAPOLEON, AND WELLINGTON.


Five generals, by the common consent of men, stand forth pre-eminent in
modern times for the magnitude of the achievements they have effected,
and the splendour of the talents they have displayed--Eugene,
Marlborough, Frederick, Napoleon, and Wellington. It is hard to say
which appears the greatest, whether we regard the services they have
rendered to their respective countries, or the durable impress their
deeds have left on human affairs. All had difficulties the most serious
to contend with, obstacles apparently insurmountable to overcome, and
all proved in the end victorious over them. All have immortalized their
names by exploits far exceeding those recorded of other men. All have
left their effects durably imprinted in the subsequent fate of nations.
The relative position of the European states, the preservation of public
rights, the maintenance of the balance of power, the salvation of the
weak from the grasp of the strong, has been mainly owing to their
exertions. To their biography is attached not merely the fortune of the
countries to which they belonged, but the general destinies of Europe,
and through it of the human race.

To give a faithful picture, in a few pages, of such men, may seem a
hopeless, and to their merits an invidious task. A brief summary of the
chief actions of those of them to ordinary readers least known, is,
however, indispensable to lay a foundation for their comparison with
those whose deeds are as household words. It is not impossible to convey
to those who are familiar with their exploits, a pleasing _resum_ of
their leading features, and salient points of difference; to those who
are not, to give some idea of the pleasure which their study is
calculated to afford. Generals, like poets or painters, have certain
leading characteristics which may be traced through all their
achievements; a peculiar impress has been communicated by nature to
their minds, which appears, not less than on the painters canvass or in
the poets lines, in all their actions. As much as grandeur of
conception distinguishes Homer, tenderness of feeling Virgil, and
sublimity of thought Milton, does impetuous daring characterize Eugene,
consummate generalship Marlborough, indomitable firmness Frederick,
lofty genius Napoleon, unerring wisdom Wellington. Greatness in the
military, as in every other art, is to be attained only by strong
natural talents, perseveringly directed to one object, undistracted by
other pursuits, undivided by inferior ambition. The men who have risen
to the highest eminence in war, have done so by the exercise of
faculties as great, and the force of genius as transcendent, as that
which formed a Homer, a Bacon, or a Newton. Success doubtless commands
the admiration of the multitude; military glory captivates the
unthinking throng; but to those who know the military art, and can
appreciate real merit, the chief ground for admiration of its great
masters, is a sense of the difficulties, to most unknown, which they
have overcome.

PRINCE EUGENE, though belonging to the same age, often acting in the
same army, and sometimes commanding alternately with Marlborough, was a
general of an essentially different character. A descendant of the House
of Savoy, born at Paris, in 1663, and originally destined for the
church, he early evinced a repugnance for theological studies, and,
instead of his breviary, was devouring in secret Plutarchs lives of
ancient heroes. His figure was slender, and his constitution at first
weak; but these disadvantages, which caused Louis XIV. to refuse him a
regiment, from an opinion that he was not equal to its duties, were soon
overcome by the ardour of his mind. Immediately setting out for Vienna,
he entered the imperial service; but he was still pursued by the enmity
of Louvois, who procured from Louis a decree which pronounced sentence
of banishment on all Frenchmen in the armies of foreign powers who
should fail to return to their country. I will re-enter France in spite
of him, said Eugene; and he was more than once as good as his word.
His genius for war was not methodical or scientific like that of Turenne
or Marlborough, nor essentially chivalrous like that of the Black Prince
or the Great Cond. It was more akin to the terrible sweep of the Tartar
chiefs; it savoured more of oriental daring. He was as prodigal of the
blood of his soldiers as Napoleon; but, unlike him, he never failed to
expose his own with equal readiness in the fight. He did not reserve his
attack in person for the close of the affray, like the French Emperor,
but was generally to be seen in the fire from the very outset. It was
with difficulty he could be restrained from heading the first assault of
grenadiers, or leading on the first charge of horse. His first
distinguished command was in Italy, in 1691, and his abilities soon gave
his kinsman, the Duke of Savoy, an ascendant there over the French. But
it was at the great battle of Zenta, on the Teife, where he surprised
and totally defeated Cara-Mustapha, at the head of 120,000 Turks, that
his wonderful genius for war first shone forth in its full lustre. He
there killed 20,000 of the enemy, drove 10,000 into the river, took
their whole artillery and standards, and entirely dispersed their mighty
array.

Like Nelson at Copenhagen, Eugene had gained this glorious victory by
acting in opposition to his orders, which were positively to avoid a
general engagement. This circumstance, joined to the envy excited by his
unparalleled triumph, raised a storm at Court against the illustrious
general, and led to his being deprived of his command, and even
threatened with a court-martial. The public voice, however, at Vienna,
loudly condemned such base ingratitude towards so great a benefactor to
the imperial dominions: the want of his directing eye was speedily felt
in the campaign with the Turks, and the Emperor was obliged to restore
him to his command, which he, however, only agreed to accept on being
given _carte blanche_ for the conduct of the war. The peace of
Carlowetz, in 1699, between the Imperialists and the Ottomans, soon
after restored him to a pacific life, and the study of history, in
which, above any other, he delighted. But on the breaking out of the war
of the Succession, in 1701, he was restored to his military duties, and
during two campaigns measured his strength, always with success, in the
plains of Lombardy, with the scientific abilities of Marshal Catinat,
and the learned experience of Marshal Villeroi, the latter of whom he
made prisoner during a nocturnal attack on Cremona, in 1703. In 1704, he
was transferred to the north of the Alps to unite with Marlborough in
making head against the great army of Marshal Tallard, which was
advancing, in so threatening a manner, through Bavaria; and he shared
with the illustrious Englishman the glories of Blenheim, which at once
delivered Germany, and hurled the French armies with disgrace behind the
Rhine. Then commenced that steady friendship, and sincere and mutual
regard, between these illustrious men, which continued unbroken till the
time of their death, and is not the least honourable trait in the
character of each. But the want of his protecting arm was long felt in
Italy: the great abilities of the Duke de Vendme had well-nigh
counterbalanced there all the advantages of the allies in Germany; and
the issue of the war in the plains of Piedmont continued doubtful till
the glorious victory of Eugene, on the 7th Sept. 1706, when he stormed
the French intrenchments around Turin, defended by eighty thousand men,
at the head of thirty thousand only, and totally defeated Marshal Marsin
and the Duke of Orleans, with such loss, that the French armies were
speedily driven across the Alps.

Eugene was now received in the most flattering manner at Vienna: the
lustre of his exploits had put to silence, if not to shame, the
malignity of his enemies. I have but one fault to find with you, said
the Emperor when he was first presented to him after his victory, and
that is that you expose yourself too much. He was next placed at the
head of the Imperial armies in Flanders; and shared with Marlborough in
the conduct, as he did in the glories, of Oudenarde and Malplaquet.
Intrusted with the command of the corps which besieged Lille, he was
penetrated with the utmost admiration for Marshal Boufflers, and
evinced the native generosity of his disposition, by the readiness with
which he granted the most favourable terms to the illustrious besieged
chief, who had with equal skill and valour conducted the defence. When
the articles of capitulation proposed by Boufflers were placed before
him, he said at once, without looking at them, I will subscribe them at
once: knowing well you would propose nothing unworthy of you and me.
The delicacy of his subsequent attentions to his noble prisoner evinced
the sincerity of his admiration. When Marlboroughs influence at the
English Court was sensibly declining, in 1711, he repaired to London,
and exerted all his talents and address to bring the English council
back to the common cause, and restore his great rival to his former
ascendency with Queen Anne. When it was all in vain, and the English
armies withdrew from the coalition, Eugene did all that skill and genius
could achieve to make up for the great deficiency arising from the
withdrawal of Marlborough and his gallant followers; and when it had
become apparent that he was over-matched by the French armies, he was
the first to counsel his Imperial master to conclude peace, which was
done at Rastadt on the 6th March, 1714.

Great as had been the services then performed by Eugene for the
Imperialists, they were outdone by those which he subsequently rendered
in the wars with the Turks. In truth it was he who first effectually
broke their power, and for ever delivered Europe from the sabres of the
Osmanlis, by which it had been incessantly threatened for three hundred
years. Intrusted with the command of the Austrian army in Hungary, sixty
thousand strong, he gained at Peterwardin, in 1716, a complete victory
over an hundred and fifty thousand Turks. This glorious success led him
to resume the offensive, and in the following year he laid siege, with
forty thousand men, to Belgrade, the great frontier fortress of Turkey,
in presence of the whole strength of the Ottoman empire. The obstinate
resistance of the Turks, as famous then, as they have ever since been,
in the defence of fortified places, joined to the dysenteries and fevers
usual on the marshy banks of the Danube in the autumnal months, soon
reduced his effective force to twenty-five thousand men, while that of
the enemy, by prodigious efforts, had been swelled to an hundred and
fifty thousand around the besiegers lines, besides thirty thousand
within the walls. Every thing presaged that Eugene was about to undergo
the fate of Marshal Marsin twelve years before at Turin, and even his
most experienced officers deemed a capitulation the only way of
extricating them from their perilous situation. Eugene himself was
attacked and seriously weakened by the prevailing dysentery: all seemed
lost in the Austrian camp. It was in these circumstances, with this
weakened and dispirited force, that he achieved one of the most glorious
victories ever gained by the Cross over the Crescent. With admirable
skill he collected his little army together, divided it into columns of
attack, and though scarcely able to sit on horseback himself, led them
to the assault of the Turkish intrenchments. The result was equal to the
success of Csar over the Gauls at the blockade of Alesia, seventeen
centuries before. The innumerable host of the Turks was totally
defeated--all their artillery and baggage taken, and their troops
entirely dispersed. Belgrade, immediately after, opened its gates, and
has since remained, with some mutations of fortune, the great frontier
bulwark of Europe against the Turks. The successes which he gained in
the following campaign of 1718 were so decisive, that they entirely
broke the Ottoman power; and he was preparing to march to
Constantinople, when the treaty of Passarowitz put a period to his
conquests, and gave a breathing time to the exhausted Ottoman empire.[3]

From this brief sketch of his exploits, it may readily be understood
what was the character of Eugene as a general. He had none of the
methodical prudence of Turenne, Marlborough, or Villars. His genius was
entirely different: it was more akin to that of Napoleon, when he was
reduced to counterbalance inferiority of numbers by superiority of
skill. The immortal campaigns of 1796, in Italy, and of 1814, in
Champagne, bear a strong resemblance to those of Eugene. Like the French
Emperor, his strokes were rapid and forcible; his _coup-dil_ was at
once quick and just; his activity indefatigable; his courage undaunted;
his resources equal to any undertaking. He did not lay much stress on
previous arrangements, and seldom attempted the extensive combinations
which enabled Marlborough to command success; but dashed fearlessly on,
trusting to his own resources to extricate him out of any difficulty--to
his genius, in any circumstances, to command victory. Yet was this
daring disposition not without peril. His audacity often bordered on
rashness, his rapidity on haste; and he repeatedly brought his armies
into situations all but desperate, and which, to a general of lesser
capacity, unquestionably would have proved so. Yet in these difficulties
no one could exceed him in the energy and vigour with which he
extricated himself from the toils: and many of his greatest victories,
particularly those of Turin and Belgrade, were gained under
circumstances where even the boldest officers in his army had given him
over for lost. He was prodigal of the blood of his soldiers, and, like
Napoleon, indifferent to the sacrifices at which he purchased his
successes; but he was still more lavish of his own, and never failed to
share the hardships and dangers of the meanest of his followers. He was
engaged in thirteen pitched battles, in all of which he fought like a
common soldier. He was in consequence repeatedly, sometimes dangerously,
wounded; and it was extraordinary that his life escaped his reiterated
perils. He raised the Austrian monarchy by his triumphs to the very
highest pitch of glory, and finally broke the power of the Turks, the
most persevering and not the least formidable of its enemies. But the
enterprises which his genius prompted the cabinet of Vienna to
undertake, were beyond the strength of the hereditary states; and for
nearly a century after, it achieved nothing worthy, either of its
growing resources, or the military renown which he had spread around its
annals.

FREDERICK II., surnamed THE GREAT, with more justice than that title has
elsewhere been applied in modern times, was born at Berlin on the 24th
January, 1712. His education was as much neglected as ill-directed.
Destined from early youth for the military profession, he was in the
first instance subjected to a discipline so rigorous, that he conceived
the utmost aversion for a career in which he was ultimately to shine
with such eclat, and, as his only resource, threw himself with ardour
into the study of French literature, for which he retained a strong
predilection through the whole of his subsequent life. Unfortunately his
education was almost entirely confined to that literature. That of his
own country, since so illustrious, had not started into existence. Of
Italian and Spanish he was ignorant. He could not read Greek; and with
Latin his acquaintance was so imperfect, as to be of no practical
service to him through life. To this unfortunate contraction of his
education his limited taste in literature, in subsequent life, is
chiefly to be ascribed. He at first was desirous of espousing an English
princess; but his father, who was most imperious in his disposition,
decided otherwise, and he was compelled, in 1733, to marry the Princess
Elizabeth of Brunswick. This union, like most others contracted under
restraint, proved unfortunate; and it did not give Frederick the
blessing of an heir to the throne. Debarred from domestic enjoyments,
the young prince took refuge with more eagerness than ever in literary
pursuits; the chateau of Rhinsberg, which was his favourite abode, was
styled by him in his transport the Palace of the Muses; and the
greatest general and most hardy soldier of modern times spent some years
of his youth in corresponding with Maupertuis, Voltaire, and other
French philosophers, and in making indifferent verses and madrigals,
which gave no token of any remarkable genius. He had already prepared
for the press a book entitled Refutation of the Prince of Machiavel,
when, in 1740, the death of his father called him to the throne, its
duties, its dangers, and its ambition.

The philosophers were in transports, when they beheld one of
themselves, as they styled him, elevated to a throne: they flattered
themselves that he would continue his literary pursuits, and acknowledge
their influence, when surrounded by the attractions, and wielding the
patronage of the crown. They soon found their mistake. Frederick
continued through life his literary tastes: he corresponded with
Voltaire and the philosophers through all his campaigns: he made French
verses, in his tent, after tracing out the plans of the battles of
Leuthen and Rosbach. But his heart was in his kingdom: his ambition was
set on its aggrandizement: his passion was war, by which alone it could
be achieved. Without being discarded, the philosophers and madrigals
were soon forgotten. The finances and the army occupied his whole
attention. The former were in admirable order, and his father had even
accumulated a large treasure which remained in the exchequer. The army,
admirably equipped and disciplined, already amounted to 60,000 men: he
augmented it to 80,000. Nothing could exceed the vigour he displayed in
every department, or the unceasing attention he paid to public affairs.
Indefatigable day and night, sober and temperate in his habits, he
employed even artificial means to augment the time during the day he
could devote to business. Finding that he was constitutionally inclined
to more sleep than he deemed consistent with the full discharge of all
his regal duties, he ordered his servants to waken him at five in the
morning; and if words were not effectual to rouse him from his sleep, he
commanded them, on pain of dismissal, to apply linen steeped in cold
water to his person. This order was punctually executed, even in the
depth of winter, till nature was fairly subdued, and the king had gained
the time he desired from his slumbers.

It was not long before he had an opportunity of evincing at once the
vigour and unscrupulous character of his mind. The Emperor Charles VI.
having died on the 20th October, 1740, the immense possessions of the
house of Austria devolved to his daughter, since so famous by the name
of MARIA THERESA. The defenceless condition of the imperial dominions,
consisting of so many different and discordant states, some of them but
recently united under one head, when under the guidance of a young
unmarried princess, suggested to the neighbouring powers the idea of a
partition. Frederick eagerly united with France in this project. He
revived some old and obsolete claims of Prussia to Silesia; but in his
manifesto to the European powers, upon invading that province, he was
scarcely at the pains to conceal the real motives of his aggression. It
is, said he, an army ready to take the field, treasures long
accumulated, and perhaps the desire to acquire glory. He was not long
in winning the battle, though it was at first rather owing to the skill
of his generals, and discipline of his soldiers, than his own capacity.
On the 10th April, 1741, the army under his command gained a complete
victory over the Austrians, at Mollwitz, in Silesia, which led to the
entire reduction of that rich and important province. The king owed
little to his own courage, however, on this occasion. Like Wellington,
the first essay in arms of so indomitable a hero was unfortunate. He
fled from the field of battle, at the first repulse of his cavalry; and
he was already seven miles off, where he was resting in a mill, when he
received intelligence that his troops had regained the day; and at the
earnest entreaties of General afterwards Marshal Schwerin, he returned
to take the command of the army. Next year, however, he evinced equal
courage and capacity in the battle of Czaslau, which he gained over the
Prince of Lorraine. Austria, on the brink of ruin, hastened to disarm
the most formidable of her assailants; and, by a separate peace,
concluded at Breslau on June 11, 1742, she ceded to Prussia nearly the
whole of Silesia.

This cruel loss, however, was too plainly the result of necessity to be
acquiesced in without a struggle by the Cabinet of Vienna. Maria Theresa
made no secret of her determination to resume possession of the lost
province on the first convenient opportunity. Austria soon united the
whole of Germany in a league against Frederick, who had no ally but the
King of France. Assailed by such a host of enemies, however, the young
king was not discouraged, and, boldly assuming the initiative, he gained
at Hohenfriedberg a complete victory over his old antagonist the Prince
of Lorraine. This triumph was won entirely by the extraordinary genius
displayed by the King of Prussia: It was one of those battles, says
the military historian, Guibert, where a great master makes every thing
give way before him, and which is gained from the very beginning,
because he never gives the enemy time to recover from their disorder.
The Austrians made great exertions to repair the consequences of this
disaster, and with such success, that in four months Prince Charles of
Lorraine again attacked him at the head of 50,000 men near Soor.
Frederick had not 25,000, but with these he again defeated the Austrians
with immense loss, and took up his winter quarters in Silesia. So vast
were the resources, however, of the great German League, of which
Austria was the head, that they were enabled to keep the field during
winter, and even meditate a _coup-de-main_ against the king, in his
capital of Berlin. Informed of this design, Frederick lost not a moment
in anticipating it by a sudden attack on his part on his enemies.
Assembling his troops in the depth of winter with perfect secrecy, he
surprised a large body of Saxons at Naumberg, made himself master of
their magazines at Gorlitz, and soon after made his triumphant entry
into Dresden, where he dictated a glorious peace, on 25th December,
1745, to his enemies, which secured, permanently, Silesia to Prussia. It
was full time for the Imperialists to come to an accommodation. In
eighteen months Frederick had defeated them in four pitched battles,
besides several combats; taken 45,000 prisoners, and killed or wounded
an equal number of his enemies. His own armies had not sustained losses
to a fifth part of this amount, and the chasms in his ranks were more
than compensated by the multitude of the prisoners who enlisted under
his banners, anxious to share the fortunes of the hero who had already
filled Europe with his renown.

The ambitious and decided, and, above all, indomitable character of
Frederick, had already become conspicuous during these brief campaigns.
His correspondence, all conducted by himself, evinced a vigour and
_tranchant_ style, at that period unknown in European diplomacy, but to
which the world has since been abundantly accustomed in the
proclamations of Napoleon. Already he spoke on every occasion as the
hero and the conqueror--to conquer or die was his invariable maxim. On
the eve of his invasion of Saxony, he wrote to the Empress of Russia,
who was endeavouring to dissuade him from that design:--I wish nothing
from the King of Poland (Elector of Saxony) but to punish him in his
Electorate, and make him sign an acknowledgment of repentance in his
capital. During the negotiations for peace, he wrote to the King of
England, who had proposed the mediation of Great Britain:--These are my
conditions. I will perish with my army before departing from one iota of
them: if the Empress does not accept them, I will rise in my demands.

The peace of Dresden lasted ten years; and these were of inestimable
importance to Frederick. He employed that precious interval in
consolidating his conquests, securing the affections by protecting the
interests of his subjects, and pursuing every design which could conduce
to their welfare. Marshes were drained, lands broken up and cultivated,
manufactures established, the finances were put in the best order,
agriculture, as the great staple of the kingdom, sedulously encouraged.
His capital was embellished, and the fame of his exploits attracted the
greatest and most celebrated men in Europe. Voltaire, among the rest,
became for years his guest; but the aspiring genius and irascible temper
of the military monarch could ill accord with the vanity and insatiable
thirst for praise in the French author, and they parted with mutual
respect, but irretrievable alienation. Meanwhile, the strength of the
monarchy was daily increasing under Fredericks wise and provident
administration. The population nearly reached 6,000,000 of souls; the
cavalry mustered 30,000, all in the highest state of discipline and
equipment; and the infantry, esteemed with reason the most perfect in
Europe, numbered an hundred and twenty thousand bayonets. These troops
had long been accustomed to act together in large bodies; the best
training next to actual service in the field which an army can receive.
They had need of all their skill, and discipline, and courage, for
Prussia was ere long threatened by the most formidable confederacy that
ever yet had been directed in modern times against a single State.
Austria, Russia, France, Sweden, and Saxony, united in alliance for the
purpose of partitioning the Prussian territories. They had ninety
millions of men in their dominions, and could with ease bring four
hundred thousand men into the field. Prussia had not six million of
inhabitants, who were strained to the uttermost to array a hundred and
fifty thousand combatants--and even with the aid of England and Hanover,
not more than fifty thousand auxiliaries could be relied on. Prussia had
neither strong fortresses like Flanders, nor mountain chains like Spain,
nor a frontier stream like France. It was chiefly composed of flat
plains, unprotected by great rivers, and surrounded on all sides by its
enemies. The contest seemed utterly desperate; there did not seem a
chance of escape for the Prussian monarchy.

Frederick began the contest by one of those strokes which demonstrated
the strength of his understanding and the vigour of his determination.
Instead of waiting to be attacked, he carried the war at once into the
enemys territories, and converted the resources of the nearest of them
to his own advantage. Having received authentic intelligence of the
signature of a treaty for the partition of his kingdom by the great
powers, on 9th May 1756, he suddenly entered the Saxon territories, made
himself master of Dresden, and shut up the whole forces of Saxony in the
intrenched camp at Pirna. Marshal Brown having advanced at the head of
60,000 men to relieve them, he encountered and totally defeated him at
Lowositz, with the loss of 15,000 men. Deprived of all hope of succour,
the Saxons in Pirna, after having made vain efforts to escape, were
obliged to lay down their arms, 14,000 strong. The whole of Saxony
submitted to the victor, who thenceforward, during the whole war,
converted its entire resources to his own support. Beyond all question,
it was this masterly and successful stroke, in the very outset, and in
the teeth of his enemies, adding above a third to his warlike resources,
which enabled him subsequently to maintain his ground against the
desperate odds by which he was assailed. Most of the Saxons taken at
Pirna, dazzled by their conquerors fame, entered his service: the Saxon
youth hastened in crowds to enrol themselves under the banners of the
hero of the North of Germany. Frederick, at the same time, effectually
vindicated the step he had taken in the eyes of all Europe, by the
publication of the secret treaty of partition, taken in the archives at
Dresden, in spite of the efforts of the electress to conceal it.
Whatever might have been the case in the former war, when he seized on
Silesia, it was apparent to the world, that he now, at least, was
strictly in the right, and that his invasion of Saxony was not less
justifiable on the score of public morality, than important in its
consequences to the great contest in which he was engaged.

The allies made the utmost efforts to regain the advantages they had
lost. France, instead of the 24,000 men she was bound to furnish by the
treaty of partition, put 100,000 on foot; the Diet of Ratisbon placed
60,000 troops of the empire at the disposal of Austria; but Frederick
still preserved the ascendant. Breaking into Bohemia, in March 1757, he
defeated the Austrians in a great battle under the walls of Prague, shut
up 40,000 of their best troops in that town, and soon reduced them to
such extremities, that it was evident, if not succoured, they must
surrender. The cabinet of Vienna made the greatest efforts for their
relief Marshal Daun, whose cautious and scientific policy were
peculiarly calculated to thwart the designs, and baffle the audacity of
his youthful antagonist, advanced at the head of 60,000 men to their
relief. Frederick advanced to meet them with less than 20,000
combatants. He attacked the Imperialists in a strong position at Kolin,
on the 18th July, and, for the first time in his life, met with a bloody
defeat. His army, especially that division commanded by his brother, the
prince-royal, sustained severe losses in the retreat, which became
unavoidable, out of Bohemia; and the king confessed, in his private
correspondence, that an honourable death alone remained to him. Disaster
accumulated on every side. The English and Hanoverian army, his only
allies, capitulated at Closterseven, and left the French army, 70,000
strong, at liberty to follow the Prussians; the French and troops of the
empire, with the Duke of Richelieu at their head, menaced Magdeburg,
where the royal family of Prussia had taken refuge; and advanced towards
Dresden. The Russians, 60,000 strong, were making serious progress on
the side of Poland, and had recently defeated the Prussians opposed to
them. The king was put to the ban of the empire, and the army of the
empire, mustering 40,000, was moving against him. Four huge armies, each
stronger than his own, were advancing to crush a prince who could not
collect 30,000 men round his banners. At that period he carried a sure
poison always with him, determined not to fall alive into the hands of
his enemies. He seriously contemplated suicide, and gave vent to the
mournful, but yet heroic, sentiments with which he was inspired, in a
letter to Voltaire, terminating with the lines--

    Pour moi, mena de naufrage,
    Je dois, en affrontant lorage
    Penser, vivre et mourir en roi.

Then it was that the astonishing vigour and powers of his mind shone
forth with their full lustre. Collecting hastily 25,000 men out of his
shattered battalions, he marched against the Prince of Soubise, who, at
the head of 60,000 French and troops of the empire, was advancing
against him through Thuringia, and totally defeated him, with the loss
of 18,000 men, on the memorable field of Rosbach. Hardly was this
triumph achieved, when he was called, with his indefatigable followers,
to stem the progress of the Prince of Lorraine and Marshal Daun, who
were making the most alarming progress in Silesia. Schweidnitz, its
capital, had fallen: a large body of Prussians, under the Duke de
Bevorn, had been defeated at Breslau. That rich and important province
seemed on the point of falling again into the hands of the Austrians,
when Frederick reinstated his affairs, which seemed wholly desperate, by
one of those astonishing strokes which distinguish him, perhaps, above
any general of modern times. In the depth of winter he attacked, at
Leuthen, on the 5th December, 1757, Marshal Daun and the Prince of
Lorraine,--who had 60,000 admirable troops under their orders,--and, by
the skilful application of the _oblique_ method of attack, defeated them
entirely, with the loss of 30,000 men, of whom 18,000 were prisoners! It
was the greatest victory that had been gained in Europe since the battle
of Blenheim. Its effects were immense: the Austrians were driven
headlong out of Silesia; Schweidnitz was regained; the King of Prussia,
pursuing them, carried the war into Moravia, and laid siege to Olmutz;
and England, awakening, at the voice of Chatham, from its unworthy
slumber, refused to ratify the capitulation of Closterseven, resumed the
war on the continent with more vigour than ever, and intrusted its
direction to Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, who soon rivalled Turenne in
the skill and science of his methodical warfare.

But it was the destiny of the King of Prussia--a destiny which displayed
his great qualities in their full lustre--to be perpetually involved in
difficulties, from the enormous numerical preponderance of his enemies,
or the misfortunes of the lieutenants to whom his subordinate armies
were intrusted. Frederick could not be personally present every where at
the same time; and wherever he was absent, disaster revealed the
overwhelming superiority of the force by which he was assailed. The
siege of Olmutz, commenced in March 1758, proved unfortunate. The
battering train, at the disposal of the king, was unequal to its
reduction, and it became necessary to raise it on the approach of Daun
with a formidable Austrian army. During this unsuccessful irruption
into the south, the Russians had been making alarming progress in the
north-east, where the feeble force opposed to them was well-nigh
overwhelmed by their enormous superiority of numbers. Frederick led back
the flower of his army from Olmutz, in Moravia, crossed all Silesia and
Prussia, and encountered the sturdy barbarians at Zorndorf, defeating
them with the loss of 17,000 men, an advantage which delivered the
eastern provinces of the monarchy from this formidable invasion; dearly
purchased, however, by the sacrifice of 10,000 of his own best soldiers.
But, during the kings absence, Prince Henry of Prussia, whom he had
left in command of 16,000 men, to keep Marshal Daun in check, was
well-nigh overwhelmed by that able commander, who was again at the head
of 50,000 combatants. Frederick flew back to his support, and, having
joined his brother, took post at Hohenkirchen. The position was
unfavourable: the army inferior to the enemy. If Daun does not attack
us here, said Marshal Keith, he deserves to be hanged. I hope,
answered Frederick, he will be more afraid of us than the rope. The
Austrian veteran, however, saw his advantage, and attacked the
Prussians, during the night, with such skill, that he threw them into
momentary confusion, took 150 pieces of cannon, and drove them from
their ground, with the loss of 7000 men. Then it was that the courage
and genius of the king shone forth with their full lustre. Though
grievously wounded in the conflict, and after having seen his best
generals fall around him, he rallied his troops at daybreak,--formed
them in good order behind the village which had been surprised, and led
them leisurely to a position a mile from the field of conflict, where he
offered battle to the enemy, who did not venture to accept it. Having
remained two days in this position to re-organize his troops, he
decamped, raised the siege of Niesse, and succeeded in taking up his
winter quarters at Breslau, in the very middle of the province he had
wrested from the enemy.

The campaign of 1759 was still more perilous to Frederick; but, if
possible, it displayed his extraordinary talents in still brighter
colours. He began by observing the Austrians, under Daun and the Prince
of Lorraine, in Silesia, and reserved his strength to combat the
Russians, who were advancing, 80,000 strong, through East Prussia.
Frederick attacked them at Cunnersdorf, with 40,000 only, in an
intrenched position, guarded by 200 pieces of cannon. The first onset of
the Prussians was entirely successful: they forced the front line of the
Russian intrenchment, and took 72 pieces of cannon. But the situation of
the king was such, pressed on all sides by superior armies, that he
could not stop short with ordinary success; and, in the attempt to gain
a decisive victory, he had well-nigh lost all. The heroism of his troops
was shattered against the strength of the second line of the Russians; a
large body of Austrians came up to their support during the battle, and,
after having exhausted all the resources of courage and genius, he was
driven from the field with the loss of 20,000 men and all his artillery.
The Russians lost 18,000 men in this terrible battle, the most bloody
which had been fought for centuries in Europe, and were in no condition
to follow up their victory. Other misfortunes, however, in appearance
overwhelming, succeeded each other. General Schmellau capitulated in
Dresden; and General Finch, with 17,000 men, was obliged to lay down his
arms in the defiles of the Bohemian mountains. All seemed lost; but the
king still persevered, and the victory of Minden enabled Prince
Ferdinand to detach 12,000 men to his support. The Prussians nobly stood
by their heroic sovereign in the hour of trial; new levies supplied the
wide chasms in his ranks. Fredericks great skill averted all future
disasters, and the campaign of 1759, the _fourth_ of the war, concluded
with the king still in possession of all his dominions in the midst of
the enormous forces of his enemies.

The campaign of 1760 began in March by another disaster at Landshech,
where ten thousand Prussians were cut to pieces, under one of his
generals, and the important fortress of Glatz invested by the Austrians.
Frederick advanced to relieve it; but soon remeasured his steps to
attempt the siege of Dresden. Daun, in his turn, followed him, and
obliged the Prussian monarch to raise the siege; and he resumed his
march into Silesia, closely followed by three armies, each more numerous
than his own, under Laudon, Daun, and Lacey, without their being able to
obtain the slightest advantage over him. Laudon, the most active of
them, attempted to surprise him; but Frederick was aware of his design,
and received the attacking columns in so masterly a manner, that they
were totally defeated, with the loss of 12,000 men. Scarcely had he
achieved this victory, when he had to make head against Lacey, withstand
Daun, repel an enormous body of Russians, who were advancing through
East Prussia, and deliver Berlin, which had been a second time occupied
by his enemies. Driven to desperate measures by such an unparalleled
succession of dangers, he extricated himself from them by the terrible
battle and extraordinary victory of Torgau, on November 3, 1761, in
which, after a dreadful struggle, he defeated Daun, though intrenched to
the teeth, with the loss of 25,000 men--an advantage dearly purchased by
the loss of 18,000 of his own brave soldiers. But this victory saved the
Prussian monarchy: Daun, severely wounded in the battle, retired to
Vienna; the army withdrew into Bohemia; two-thirds of Saxony was
regained by the Prussians; the Russians and Swedes retired; Berlin was
delivered from the enemy; and the fifth campaign terminated with the
unconquerable monarch still in possession of nearly his whole dominions.

The military strength of Prussia was now all but exhausted by the
unparalleled and heroic efforts she had made. Frederick has left us the
following picture of the state of his kingdom and army at this
disastrous period:--Our condition at that period can only be likened to
that of a man riddled with balls, weakened by the loss of blood, and
ready to sink under the weight of his sufferings. The noblesse was
exhausted, the lower people ruined; numbers of villages burnt, many
towns destroyed; an entire anarchy had overturned the whole order and
police of government: in a word, desolation was universal. The army was
in no better situation. _Seventeen pitched battles_ had mowed down the
flower of the officers and soldiers; the regiments were broken down and
composed in part of deserters and prisoners: order had disappeared and
discipline relaxed to such a degree that the old infantry was little
better than a body of newly-raised militia.[4] Necessity, not less than
prudence, in these circumstances, which to any other man would have
seemed desperate, prescribed a cautious defensive policy; and it is
doubtful whether in it his greatness did not appear more conspicuous
than in the bolder parts of his former career. The campaign of 1761
passed in skilful marches and countermarches, without his numerous
enemies being able to obtain a single advantage, where the king
commanded in person. He was now, literally speaking, assailed on all
sides: the immense masses of the Austrians and Russians were converging
to one point; and Frederick, who could not muster 40,000 men under his
banners, found himself assailed by 120,000 allies, whom six campaigns
had brought to perfection in the military art. It seemed impossible he
could escape: yet he did so, and compelled his enemies to retire without
gaining the slightest advantage over him. Taking post in an intrenched
camp at Bunzelwitz, fortified with the utmost skill, defended with the
utmost vigilance, he succeeded in maintaining himself and providing his
troops for two months within cannon-shot of the enormous masses of the
Russians and Austrians, till want of provisions obliged them to
separate. It has just come to this, said Frederick, who will starve
first? He made his enemies do so. Burning with shame, they were forced
to retire to their respective territories, so that he was enabled to
take up his winter quarters at Breslau in Silesia. But, during this
astonishing struggle, disaster had accumulated in other quarters. His
camp at Bunzelwitz had only been maintained by concentrating in it
nearly the whole strength of the monarchy, and its more distant
provinces suffered severely under the drain. Schweidnitz, the capital
of Silesia, was surprised by the Austrians, with its garrison of 4000
men. Prince Henry, after the loss of Dresden, had the utmost difficulty
in maintaining himself in the part of Saxony which still remained to the
Prussians: in Silesia they had lost all but Glogau, Breslau, and Neiss;
and, to complete his misfortune, the dismissal of Lord Chatham from
office in England, had led to the stoppage of the wonted subsidy of
750,000 a-year. The resolution of the king did not sink, but his
judgment almost despaired of success under such a complication of
disasters. Determined not to yield, he discovered a conspiracy at his
head-quarters, to seize him, and deliver him to his enemies. Dreading
such a calamity more than death, he carried with him, as formerly in
similar circumstances, a sure poison, intended, in the last extremity,
to terminate his days.

Nevertheless, as he himself said, affairs which seemed desperate, in
reality were not so; and perseverance at length surmounted every peril.
Fortune often, in real life as well as in romance, favours the brave. In
the case of Frederick, however, it would be unjust to say he was
favoured by Fortune. On the contrary, she long proved adverse to him;
and he recovered her smiles only by heroically persevering till the
ordinary chance of human affairs turned in his favour. He accomplished
what in serious cases is the great aim of medicine; he made the patient
survive the disease. In the winter of 1761, the Empress of Russia died,
and was succeeded by Peter III. That prince had long conceived the most
ardent admiration for Frederick, and he manifested it in the most
decisive manner on his accession to the throne, by not only withdrawing
from the alliance, but uniting his forces with those of Prussia against
Austria. This great event speedily changed the face of affairs. The
united Prussians and Russians under Frederick, 70,000 strong, retook
Schweidnitz in the face of Daun, who had only 60,000 men; and, although
the sudden death of the Czar Peter in a few months deprived him of the
aid of his powerful neighbours, yet Russia took no farther part in the
contest. France, exhausted and defeated in every quarter of the globe by
England, could render no aid to Austria, upon whom the whole weight of
the contest fell. It was soon apparent that she was over-matched by the
Prussian hero. Relieved from the load which had so long oppressed him,
Frederick vigorously resumed the offensive. Silesia was wholly regained
by the king in person: the battle of Freyberg gave his brother, Prince
Henry, the ascendant in Saxony; and the cabinet of Vienna, seeing the
contest hopeless, were glad to make peace at Hubertsbourg, on 15th
February, 1763, on terms which left Silesia and his whole dominions to
the King of Prussia.

He entered Berlin in triumph after six years absence, in an open
chariot, with Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick seated by his side. No words
can paint the enthusiasm of the spectators at the august spectacle, or
the admiration with which they regarded the hero who had filled the
world with his renown. It was no wonder they were proud of their
sovereign. His like had never been seen in modern times. He had founded
and saved a kingdom. He had conquered Europe in arms. With six millions
of subjects he had vanquished powers possessing ninety millions. He had
created a new era in the art of war. His people were exhausted,
pillaged, ruined; their numbers had declined a tenth during the contest.
But what then? They had come victorious out of a struggle unparalleled
in modern times: the halo of Leuthen and Rosbach, of Zorndorf and
Torgau, played round their bayonets; they were inspired with the energy
which so speedily repairs any disaster. Frederick wisely and
magnanimously laid aside the sword when he resumed the pacific sceptre.
His subsequent reign was almost entirely pacific; all the wounds of war
were speedily healed under his sage and beneficent administration.
Before his death, his subjects were double, and the national wealth
triple what it had been at the commencement of his reign: and Prussia
now boasts of sixteen millions of inhabitants, and a population
increasing faster in numbers and resources than any other state in
Europe.

No laboured character, no studied eulogium, can paint Frederick like
this brief and simple narrative of his exploits. It places him at once
at the head of modern generals,--if Hannibal be excepted, perhaps of
ancient and modern. He was not uniformly successful: on the contrary, he
sustained several dreadful defeats. But that arose from the enormous
superiority of force by which he was assailed, and the desperate state
of his affairs, which were generally so pressing, that a respite even in
one quarter could be obtained only by a victory instantly gained, under
whatever circumstances, in another. What appears rashness was often in
him the height of wisdom. He could protract the struggle only by strong
and vigorous strokes and the lustre of instant success, and they could
not be dealt out without risking receiving as many. The fact of his
maintaining the struggle against such desperate odds proves the general
wisdom of his policy. No man ever made more skilful use of an interior
line of communication, or flew with such rapidity from one threatened
part of his dominions to another. None ever, by the force of skill in
tactics and sagacity in strategy, gained such astonishing successes with
forces so inferior. And if some generals have committed fewer faults,
none were impelled by such desperate circumstances to a hazardous
course, and none had ever so much magnanimity in confessing and
explaining them for the benefit of future times.

The only general in modern times who can bear a comparison with
Frederick, if the difficulties of his situation are considered, is
Napoleon. It is a part only of his campaigns, however, which sustains
the analogy. There is no resemblance between the mighty conqueror
pouring down the valley of the Danube, at the head of 180,000 men,
invading Russia with 500,000, or overrunning Spain with 300,000, and
Frederick the Great with 30,000 or 40,000, turning every way against
quadruple the number of Austrians, French, Swedes, and Russians. Yet a
part, and the most brilliant part of Napoleons career, bears a close
resemblance to that of the Prussian hero. In Lombardy in 1796, in Saxony
in 1813, and in the plains of Champaigne in 1814, he was upon the whole
inferior in force to his opponents, and owed the superiority which he
generally enjoyed on the point of attack to the rapidity of his
movements, and the skill with which, like Frederick, he availed himself
of an interior line of communication. His immortal campaign in France in
1814, in particular, where he bore up with 70,000 men against 250,000
enemies, bears the closest resemblance to those which Frederick
sustained for six years against the forces of the Coalition. Rapidity of
movement, skill in strategy, and the able use of an interior line of
communication, were what enabled both to compensate a prodigious
inferiority of force. Both were often to appearance rash, because the
affairs of each were so desperate, that nothing could save them but an
audacious policy. Both were indomitable in resolution, and preferred
ruin and death to sitting down on a dishonoured throne. Both were from
the outset of the struggle placed in circumstances apparently hopeless,
and each succeeded in protracting it solely by his astonishing talent
and resolution. The fate of the two was widely different: the one
transmitted an honoured and aggrandized throne to his successors; the
other, overthrown and discrowned, terminated his days on the rock of St.
Helena. But success is not always the test of real merit: the verdict of
ages is often different from the judgment of present times. Hannibal
conquered, has left a greater name among men than Scipio victorious. In
depth of thought, force of genius, variety of information, and splendour
of success, Frederick will bear no comparison with Napoleon. But
Fredericks deeds as a general were more extraordinary than those of the
French emperor, because he bore up longer against greater odds. It is
the highest praise of Napoleon to say, that he did in one campaign--his
last and greatest--what Frederick had done in six.

If the campaigns of Eugene and Frederick suggest a comparison with those
of Napoleon, those of Marlborough challenge a parallel with those of the
other great commander of our day--Wellington. Their political and
military situations were in many respects alike. Both combated at the
head of the forces of an alliance, composed of dissimilar nations,
actuated by separate interests, inflamed by different passions. Both had
the utmost difficulty in soothing their jealousies and stifling their
selfishness; and both found themselves often more seriously impeded by
the allied cabinets in their rear, than by the enemys forces in their
front. Both were the generals of a nation, which, albeit covetous of
military glory, and proud of warlike renown, is to the last degree
impatient of previous preparation, and frets at the cost of wars, which
its political position renders unavoidable, or its ambitious spirit had
readily undertaken. Both were compelled to husband the blood of their
soldiers, and spare the resources of their governments, from the
consciousness that they had already been strained to the uttermost in
the cause, and that any farther demands would render the war so
unpopular as speedily to lead to its termination. The career of both
occurred at a time when political passions were strongly roused in their
country; when the war in which they were engaged was waged against the
inclination, and, in appearance at least, against the interests of a
large and powerful party at home, which sympathized from political
feeling with their enemies, and were ready to decry every success and
magnify every disaster of their own arms, from a secret feeling that
their party elevation was identified rather with the successes of the
enemy than with those of their own countrymen. The Tories were to
Marlborough precisely what the Whigs were to Wellington. Both were
opposed to the armies of the most powerful monarch, led by the most
renowned generals of Europe, whose forces, preponderating over the
adjoining states, had come to threaten the liberties of all Europe, and
at length produced a general coalition to restrain the ambition from
which so much detriment had already been experienced.

But while in these respects the two British heroes were placed very much
in the same circumstances, in other particulars, not less material,
their situations were widely different. Marlborough had never any
difficulties approaching those which beset Wellington to struggle with.
By great exertions, both on his own part and that of the British and
Dutch governments, his force was generally equal to that with which he
had to contend. It was often exactly so. War at that period, in the Low
Countries at least, consisted chiefly of a single battle during a
campaign, followed by the siege of two or three frontier fortresses. The
number of strongholds with which the country bristled, rendered any
farther or more extensive operations, in general, impossible. This state
of matters at once rendered success more probable to a general of
superior abilities, and made it more easy to repair disaster. No
vehement passions had been roused, bringing whole nations into the
field, and giving one state, where they had burnt the fiercest, a vast
superiority in point of numbers over its more pacific or less excited
neighbours. But in all these respects, the circumstances in which
Wellington was placed, were not only not parallel--they were contrasted.
From first to last, in the Peninsula, he was enormously outnumbered by
the enemy. Until the campaign of 1813, when his force in the field was,
for the first time, equal to that of the French, the superiority to
which he was opposed was so prodigious, that the only surprising thing
is, how he was not driven into the sea in the very first encounter.

While the French had never less than 200,000, sometimes as many as
260,000 effective troops at their disposal, after providing for all
their garrisons and communications, the English general had never more
than 30,000 effective British and 20,000 Portuguese around his standard.
The French were directed by the Emperor, who, intent on the subjugation
of the Peninsula, and wielding the inexhaustible powers of the
conscription for the supply of his armies, cared not though he lost
100,000 men, so as he purchased success by their sacrifice in every
campaign. Wellington was supported at home by a government, which,
raising its soldiers by voluntary enrolment, could with difficulty
supply a drain of 15,000 men a-year from their ranks, and watched by a
party which decried every advantage, and magnified every disaster, in
order to induce the entire withdrawal of the troops from the Peninsula.
Napoleon sent into Spain a host of veterans trained in fifteen years
combats, who had carried the French standards into every capital of
Europe. Wellington led to this encounter troops admirably disciplined,
indeed, but almost all unacquainted with actual war, and who had often
to learn the rudiments even of the most necessary field operations in
presence of the enemy. Marlboroughs troops, though heterogeneous and
dissimilar, had been trained to their practical duties in the preceding
wars under William III., and brought into the field a degree of
experience noways inferior to that of their opponents. Whoever weighs
with impartiality those different circumstances, cannot avoid arriving
at the conclusion that as Wellingtons difficulties were incomparably
more formidable than Marlboroughs, so his merit, in surmounting them,
was proportionally greater.

Though similar in many respects, so far as the general conduct of their
campaigns is concerned, from the necessity under which both laboured of
husbanding the blood of their soldiers, the military qualities of
Englands two chiefs were essentially different, and each possessed some
points in which he was superior to the other. By nature Wellington was
more daring than Marlborough, and though soon constrained, by necessity,
to adopt a cautious system, he continued, throughout all his career, to
incline more to a hazardous policy. The intrepid advance and fight at
Assaye; the crossing of the Douro and movement on Talavera in 1809; the
advance to Madrid and Burgos in 1812; the actions before Bayonne in
1813; the desperate stand made at Waterloo in 1815--place this beyond a
doubt. Marlborough never hazarded so much on the success of a single
enterprise: he ever aimed at compassing his objects by skill and
combination, rather than risking them on the chance of arms. Wellington
was a mixture of Turenne and Eugene: Marlborough was the perfection of
the Turenne school alone. No man could fight more ably and gallantly
than Marlborough: his talent and rapidity of eye in tactics were, at
least, equal to his skill in strategy and previous combination. But he
was not partial to such desperate passages at arms, and never resorted
to them, but from necessity or the emergency of a happy opportunity for
striking a blow. The proof of this is decisive. Marlborough, during ten
campaigns, fought only five pitched battles. Wellington in seven fought
fifteen, in every one of which he proved victorious.[5]

Marlboroughs consummate generalship, throughout his whole career, kept
him out of disaster. It was said, with justice, that he never fought a
battle which he did not gain, nor laid siege to a town which he did not
take. He took above twenty fortified places of the first order,
generally in presence of an enemys army superior to his own.
Wellingtons bolder disposition, more frequently involved him in peril,
and on some occasions caused serious losses to his army; but they were
the price at which he purchased his transcendent successes. But
Wellingtons bolder strategy gained for him advantages which the more
circumspect measures of his predecessor never could have attained.
Marlborough would never, with scarcely any artillery, have hazarded the
attack on Burgos, nor incurred the perilous chances of the retreat from
that town; but he never would have delivered the South of the Peninsula
in a single campaign, by throwing himself, with 40,000 men, upon the
communications, in the North, of 200,000. It is hard to say which was
the greater general, if their merits in the field alone are considered;
but Wellingtons successes were the more vital to his country, for they
delivered it from the greater peril; and they were more honourable to
himself, for they were achieved against greater odds. And his fame, in
future times, will be proportionally brighter; for the final overthrow
of Napoleon, and destruction of the revolutionary power, in a single
battle, present an object of surpassing interest, to which there is
nothing in history, perhaps, parallel, and which, to the latest
generation, will fascinate the minds of men.

The examination of the comparative merits of these two illustrious
generals, and the enumeration of the names of their glorious triumphs,
suggests one reflection of a very peculiar kind. That England is a
maritime power, that the spirit of her inhabitants is essentially
nautical, and that the sea is the element on which her power has chiefly
been developed, need be told to none who reflect on the magnitude of her
present colonial empire, and how long she has wielded the empire of the
waves. The French are the first to tell us that her strength is confined
to that element; that she is, at land, only a third-rate power; and that
the military career does not suit the genius of her people. How, then,
has it happened that England, the nautical power, and little inured to
land operations, has inflicted greater wounds upon France by _military_
success, than any other power, and that in almost all the pitched
battles which the two nations have fought, during five centuries, the
English have proved victorious? That Englands military force is
absorbed in the defence of a colonial empire which encircles the earth,
is indeed certain, and, in every age, the impatience of taxation in her
people has starved down her establishment, during peace, to so low a
point, as rendered the occurrence of disaster, in the first years
consequent on the breaking out of war, a matter of certainty; while the
military spirit of its neighbours has kept theirs at the level which
ensures early success. Yet with all these disadvantages, and with a
population which, down to the close of the last war, was little more
than half that of France, she has inflicted far greater _land_ disasters
on her redoubtable neighbour than all the military monarchies of Europe
put together.

English armies, for 120 years, ravaged France: they have twice taken its
capital; an English king was crowned at Paris; a French king rode
captive through London; a French emperor died in English captivity, and
his remains were surrendered by English generosity. Twice the English
horse marched from Calais to the Pyrenees; the monuments of Napoleon in
the French capital at this moment, owe their preservation from German
revenge to an English general. All the great disasters and days of
mourning for France, since the battle of Hastings,--Tenchebray, Cressy,
Poitiers, Azincour, Verneuil, Blenheim, Oudenarde, Ramilies, Malplaquet,
Minden, Quebec, Egypt, Talavera, Salamanca, Vittoria, Orthes, the
Pyrenees, Waterloo,--were all gained by English generals, and won, for
the most part, by English soldiers. Even at Fontenoy, the greatest
victory over England of which France can boast since Hastings, every
regiment in the French army was, on their own admission, routed by the
terrible English column, and victory was snatched from its grasp solely
by want of support on the part of the Dutch and Austrians. No coalition
against France has ever been successful, in which England did not take a
prominent part; none, in the end, failed of gaining its objects, in
which she stood foremost in the fight. This fact is so apparent on the
surface of history, that it is admitted by the ablest French historians,
though they profess themselves unable to explain it.

Is it that there is a degree of hardihood and courage in the Anglo-Saxon
race which renders them, without the benefit of previous experience in
war, adequate to the conquest, on land, even of the most warlike
Continental military nations? Is it that the quality of dogged
resolution, determination not to be conquered, is of such value in war,
that it compensates almost any degree of inferiority in the practical
acquaintance with war? Is it that the North brings forth a bolder race
of men than the South, and that, other things being equal, the people in
a more rigorous climate will vanquish those in a more genial? Is it that
the free spirit which, in every age, has distinguished the English
people, has communicated a degree of vigour and resolution to their
warlike operations, which has rendered them so often victorious in land
fights, albeit nautical and commercial in their ideas, over their
military neighbours? Or is it, that this courage in war, and this vigour
in peace, and this passion for freedom at all times, arise from and are
but symptoms of an ardent and aspiring disposition, imprinted by Nature
on the races to whom was destined the dominion of half the globe?
Experience has not yet determined to which of these causes this most
extraordinary fact has been owing; but it is one upon which our military
neighbours, and especially the French, would do well to ponder, now that
the population of the British isles will, on the next census, be _thirty
millions_. If England has done such things in Continental warfare, with
an army which never brought fifty thousand native British sabres and
bayonets into the field, what would be the result if national distress
or necessities, or a change in the objects of general desire, were to
send two hundred thousand?




LAYS AND LEGENDS OF THE THAMES.

PART II.


----Rushing along, leaving innumerable chimneys behind pouring out
sempiternal smoke; the air filled with a perpetual clank of hammers, the
crashing of enormous wheels, and jangling of colossal chains; every
human being within sight being as black as a negro, and the gust from
the shore giving the closest resemblance to a blast between the tropics.
Our steamer played her part handsomely in this general effort to stifle
the population, and threw columns of smoke, right and left, as she moved
through the bends of the river, thick enough to have choked an army of
coal-heavers. I am as little of a sentimentalist as any man; I have
always pronounced Rousseau an impostor. I regretted that the pillory has
been abolished in the days of the modern novelists of France; but I was
nearly in a state of suffocation, and some allowance must be made for
the wrath of asphyxia. As I looked on the fuliginous sky, and the
cineritious earth, on the ember-coloured trees, and half vitrified
villas, the whole calcined landscape, I involuntarily asked myself, what
is the good of all this hammering, forging, and roasting alive? Is man
to be made perfect in the manner of a Westphalia ham? or is it to be the
crowning glory of a nation, that she is the great nail-maker to the
civilized globe? Is her whole soul to be absorbed in the making of
chain-cables and cotton-twist? Are all her aspirations to breathe only
linsey-woolsey, Yorkshire broadcloth, and Birmingham buttons? Are the
cheeks of her maids to grow pallid, for the sake of clothing the lower
portion of a Hindoo mountaineer in flannel, and the forehead of an
African savage in book-muslin? Or are our men, by nature the finest race
in the world, to be crippled into the physiognomy and faculties of
baboons, merely to make shawls for the Queen of Madagascar, or slippers
for the great Mogul?

I was startled, by an universal run towards the head of the steamer.
Men, women, children, lap-dogs, and all rushed forward, followed by an
avalanche of bandboxes, which, heaped half chimney high, had heaved with
a sudden lurch of the helm, and over-spread the deck with a chaos of
caps, bonnets, and inferior appendages to the toilet. In the cloud of
smoke above, around, and below, we had as nearly as possible run ashore
upon the Isle of Dogs. The captain, as all the regular reports on
occasions of disaster say, behaved in this extremity with a coolness, a
firmness, and a sagacity worthy of all admiration. He had made nine
hundred and ninety-nine voyages, to Margate before; it was therefore
wholly impossible that he could have shot the head of his ship into the
mud of the left bank of the Thames on his thousandth transit. The fact,
however, seemed rather against the theory. But as I was not drowned, was
not a shareholder in the vessel, and have an antipathy to
courts-martial, I turned from the brawling of the present, to the
bulletins of the past, and thought of Dog-land in its glory.


THE ISLE OF DOGS.

_On Linden when the sun was low._

    Ten thousand years the Isle of Dogs,
    Lay sunk in mire, and hid in fogs,
    Rats, cats and bats, and snakes and frogs--
            The tenants of its scenery.

    No pic-nic parties came from town,
    To dance with nymphs, white, black, or brown,
    (They stopped at Greenwich, at the Crown,
            Neglecting all its greenery.)

    Dut Dog-land saw another sight,
    When serjeants cried, Eyes left, eyes right,
    And jackets blue, and breeches white,
            Were seen upon its tenantry.

    Then tents along the shore were seen,
    Then opened shop the gay Canteen,
    And floated flags, inscribed,--The Queen.
            All bustle, show, and pennantry.

    There strutted laughter-loving Pat,
    John Bull (in spirits rather flat,)
    And Donald, restless as a rat,
            Three nations in their rivalry.

    There bugle rang, and rattled drum,
    And sparkled in the glass the rum,
    Each hero thinking of his plum,
            The prize of Spanish chivalry.

    At last, Blue-Peter mast-high shone,
    The Isle of Dogs was left alone,
    The bats and rats then claimed their own
            By process sure and summary.

    The bold battalions saild for Spain,
    Soon longing to get home again,
    Finding their stomachs tried in vain
            To live on Spanish _flummery_.

A cloud of smoke, which the wrath of olus poured upon our vessel, as a
general contribution from all the forges along shore, here broke my
reverie, by nearly suffocating the ships company. But the river in this
quarter is as capricious as the fashions of a French milliner, or the
loves of a figurante. We rounded a point of land, emerged into blue
stream and bright sky, and left the whole Cyclopean region behind,
ruddied with jets of flame, and shrouded with vapour, like a
re-rehearsal of the great fire of London.

I had scarcely time to rejoice in the consciousness that I breathed
once more, when my ear was caught by the sound of a song at the
fore-part of the deck. The voice was of that peculiar kind, which once
belonged to the stage coachman, (a race now belonging alone to
history,)--strong without clearness; full without force; deep without
profundity, and, as Sydney Smith says, a great many other things
_without_ a great many other things; or, as Dr. Parr would tell
mankind,--the product of nights of driving and days of indulgence; of
facing the wintry storm, and enjoying the genial cup, the labours of the
Jehu, and the luxuries of the Sybarite,--it was to Moores melody,--

      ----My dream of life
    From morn till night,
    Was love, still, love.


THE SONG OF THE MAIL-COACHMAN.

      Oh, the days were bright
      When, young and light,
        I drove my team,
      My four-in-hand
      Along the Strand,
        Of bloods the cream.
      But time flies fast:
      Those days are past,
        The ribbons are a dream:
    Now, theres nothing half so quick in life
        As steam, still, steam.

      The Bristol Mail,
      Is but a snail,
        The York stands still,
      The Liverpool
      Is but a stool--
        All gone down hill.
      Your fire you poke,
      Up springs your smoke,
        On sweeps the fiery stream:
    Now, theres nothing half so quick in life
      As steam, still, steam.

      Along the sky
      The sparkles fly,
        _You_ fly below,--
      You leave behind
      Time, tide, and wind,
        Hail, rain, and snow.
      Through mountain cores
      The engine snores,
        The gas lamps palely gleam:
    Oh, theres nothing half so quick in life
      As steam, still, steam.

      You see a hill,
      You see a mill,
        A bit of sky;
      You see a cow,
      You see a plough,
        All shooting by.
      The cabins prance,
      The hedgerows dance,
        Like gnats in Evenings beam:
    Oh, theres nothing half so quick in life
        As steam, still, steam.

      You hear a sound,
      You feel a bound,
        You all look blue.
      Youve split a horse,
      A mans a corse.
        Alls one to you.
      Upon the road
      You meet a load,
        In vain you wildly scream.
    Oh, theres nothing half so quick in life
        As steam, still, steam.

      You come full front
      Upon a hunt,
        You hear a yell;
      You dash along,
      You crush the throng,
        Dogs, squires, pell-mell.
      You see a van;
      The signal man
        Is snugly in a dream.
    Oh, theres nothing half so quick in life
      As steam, still, steam.

      You see a flash,
      You feel a crash,
        From toe to chin.
      You touch a bank,
      You top a tank,
        You all plump in.
      You next engage
      The three-mile stage,
        And long for my old team,
    Your trials oer, you trust no more,
      To steam, steam, steam!

The romantic disappears from the world every day. Canals and docks now
vulgarize this tract of the shore, and the whole scene will yet undergo
the fate of Billingsgate. But it has a story as romantic as that of
Romeo and Juliet; excepting the masquerade, the moonlight, and the
nightingales of Verona.

The Isle flies from me, and I must give but the outline.

The daughter of the old Baron de Bouvraye, one of the followers of
William the Norman, and lord of the country for leagues along the
northern shore of the Thames, was the court beauty of the time. With the
Norman dignity of form, she had the Saxon beauty of countenance; for the
Baron had wedded a Saxon heiress. The charms of the Lady Blanche de
Bouvraye, were the theme of the whole race of troubadours; and the most
popular poem of Guido de Spezzia was written on the incident of her
dropping her wimple at a court ball. It was said that she had a thousand
lovers; but it is certain, that suitors crowded from every part of
Christendom to claim her hand--a number probably not diminished by the
knowledge that she was to succeed to the immense possessions of the
barony.

But, to the sorrow of some, the indignation of others, and the
astonishment of all, the Lady Blanche laughed at the idea of love.
William, not accustomed to have his orders disputed, commanded the
beautiful heiress to fall in love with some one or other at a moments
delay. But she laughed at the herald who bore the command, and bade him
tell his master, that though armies might be commanded, and crowns
conquered, Blanche de Bouvraye would be neither. William was indignant,
and ordered the herald to prison for a month, and to be fed on bread and
water, for the audacity of bringing back such an answer. But the lady
was unchanged. The Baron remonstrated, and demanded whether she was
prepared to see his line extinguished, and his lands go to strangers.
She laughed and said, that as the former could not be while she lived,
and the latter could take place only after she was dead, she saw no
reason why she should concern herself on the subject. The abbess of the
famous convent of the Celestines, near the ford of the river Rom, where
the town of Romford has since grown up, was sent to argue with her. But
her answer was the question, Why had not the abbess herself married?
Her father confessor was next sent to her. But she sportively asked him,
Where were _his_ wife and children?--a question which, though put in
all innocence, so perplexed the good father, that, not desiring to be
the penitent instead of the confessor, he returned with all possible
speed to his convent.

Yet the Lady Blanches eye often exhibited the signs of weeping, and her
cheek grew pale. All was a problem, until a handsome youth, the son of a
knight on the Kentish shore, was seen one night touching a theorbo under
her window, and singing one of the Tuscan love songs, which the
troubadours had brought into England.

This was enough for the suspicions of the Baron. The young minstrel was
seized, and sent to join the Crusaders then embarking for the Holy Land;
and the lady was consigned to the Barons castle in Normandy. As
Shakspeare said four hundred years after,

    The course of true love never does run smooth.

It would take the pen and song of ten troubadours to tell the adventures
of the lady and the youth. In the fashion of the age, they had each
consulted an astrologer, and each had been told the same fortune, that
they should constantly meet, but be constantly separated, and finally be
happy.

In Normandy, the Barons castle and the lady had fallen together into
the hands of the troops who had rebelled against William, when a band of
the crusaders on the march, commanded by her lover, rescued her. The
lady was next ordered to take up her abode in a convent in Lombardy, of
which her fathers sister was the abbess. The vessel in which she
embarked was driven up the Mediterranean by a storm, and wrecked on the
shore where the army of the crusaders was encamped. Thus the lovers met
again. By the Barons order, the lady returned once more to Europe; but
when in sight of the Italian coast, the felucca was captured by an
Algerine, and, to her astonishment, she found in the pirates vessel her
lover, who had been wounded and taken prisoner in battle with the
Saracens, and sold into slavery. Again they were separated; the lady
was ransomed by her father; and the lovers seemed to have parted for
ever.

But the stars were true. The lover broke his Moorish chains, and the
first sight which the lady saw on her landing at Ancona, was the
fugitive kneeling at her feet.

I hasten on. As the vessel in which they sailed up the Thames approached
the baronial castle, they saw a black flag waving from the battlements,
and heard the funeral bell toll from the abbey of the Celestines. The
Baron had been laid in the vault of the abbey on that day. Their hopes
were now certainty: but the lady mourned for her father; and the laws of
the church forbade the marriage for a year and a day. Yet, this new
separation was soothed by the constant visits of her lover, who crossed
the river daily to bask in the smiles of his betrothed, who looked more
beautiful than ever.

The eve of the wedding-day arrived; and fate seemed now to be disarmed
of the power of dividing the faithful pair; when, as the lover was
passing through a dark grove to return to the Kentish shore for the last
time, he was struck by an arrow shot from a thicket, fainted, and saw no
more.

The morning dawned, the vassals were in array, the bride was in her silk
and velvet drapery, the brides maids had their flower-baskets in their
hands, the joy-bells pealed, a hundred horsemen were drawn up before the
castle gates,--all was pomp, joy, and impatience,--but no bridegroom
came.

At length the mournful tidings were brought, that his boat had waited
for him in vain on the evening before, and that his plume and mantle,
dabbled with blood, had been found on the sands. All now was agony. The
bank, the grove, the river, were searched by hundreds of eager eyes and
hands, but all in vain. The bride cast aside her jewels, and vowed to
live and die a maid. The castle was a house of mourning; the vassals
returned to their homes: all was stooping of heads, wringing of hands,
and gloomy lamentation.

But, as the castle bell tolled midnight, a loud barking was heard at the
gate. It was opened; and the favourite wolf-hound of the bridegroom
rushed in, making wild bounds, running to and fro, and dragging the
guard by their mantles to go forth. They followed; and he sprung before
them to the door of a hut in a swampy thicket a league from the castle.

On bursting open the door, they found a man in bed, desperately torn,
and dying from his wounds. At the sight, the noble hound flew on him;
but the dying man called for a confessor, and declared that he had
discharged the arrow by which the murder was committed, that he had dug
a grave for the dead, and that the dog had torn him in the act. The next
demand was, where the body had been laid. The dying man was carried on
the pikes of the guard to the spot; the grave was opened; the body was
taken up; and, to the astonishment of all, it was found still with
traces of life. The knight was carried to the castle, restored, wedded,
and became the lord of all the broad acres lying between the Thames and
the Epping hills.

He had been waylaid by one of his countless rivals, who had employed a
serf to make him the mark for a cloth-yard shaft, and who, like the
Irish felon of celebrated memory, saved his life by dying in jail. The
dog was, by all the laws of chivalry, an universal favourite while
living; and when dead, was buried under a marble monument in the Isle;
also giving his name to the territory; which was more than was done for
his master; and hence the title of the Isle of Dogs. Is it not all
written in _Giraldus Cambrensis_?

----Enter Limehouse Reach.--The sea-breeze comes wooingly, as we wind
by the long serpent beach; the Pool is left behind, and we see at last
the surface of the river. Hitherto it has been only a magnified
Fleet-ditch. The Thames, for the river of a grave people, is one of the
most frolicsome streams in the world. From London Bridge to the ocean,
it makes as many turns as a hard-run fox, and shoots round so many
points of the shore, that vessels a few miles off seem to be like
ropemakers working in parallel lines, or the dancers in a quadrille, or
Mr. Greens balloon running a race with his sons (the old story of
Ddalus and Icarus renewed in the 19th century); or those extravaganzas
of the Arabian Nights, in which fairy ships are holding a regatta among
meadows strewn with crysolites and emeralds, for primroses and the
grass-green turf.

But what new city is this, rising on the right? What ranges of enormous
penthouses, covering enormous ships on the stocks! what sentinels
parading! what tiers of warehouses! what boats rushing to and fro! what
life, tumult, activity, and clank of hammers again? This is Deptford.

Deep forde, says old Holinshed, alsoe called the Goldene Strande,
from the colour of its brighte sandes, the whiche verilie do shine like
new golde under the crystalle waters of the Ravensbourne, which here
floweth to old Father Thamis, even as a younge daughtere doth lovinglie
fly to the embrace of her aged parente.

But Deptford has other claims on posterity. Here it was that Peter the
Great came, to learn the art of building the fleets that were to cover
the Euxine and make the Crescent grow pale. At this moment I closed my
eyes, and lived in the penultimate year of the 17th century. The scene
had totally changed. The crowds, the ships, the tumult, all were gone; I
saw an open shore, with a few wooden dwellings on the edge of the water,
and a single ship in the act of building. A group of ship carpenters
were standing in the foreground, gazing at the uncouth fierceness with
which a tall wild figure among them was driving bolts into the keel. He
wore a common workmans coat and cap; but there was a boldness in his
figure, and a force in his movement, which showed a superior order of
man. His countenance was stern and repulsive, but stately; there was
even a touch of insanity in the writhings of the mouth and the wildness
of the eye; but it did not require the star on the cloak, which was
flung on the ground beside him, nor the massive signet ring on his hand,
to attest his rank. I saw there the most kingly of barbarians, and the
most barbarian of kings. There I saw Peter, the lord of the desert, of
the Tartar, and of the polar world.

While I was listening, in fancy, to the Song of the Steppe, which this
magnificent operative was shouting, rather than singing, in the rude joy
of his work, I was roused by a cry of Deptford!--Any one for Deptford?
Ease her; stop her!

I sprang from the bench on which I had been reclining, and the world
burst upon me again.

Deptford--any one for Deptford? cried the captain, standing on the
paddle-box. None answered the call, but a whole fleet of wherries came
skimming along the surge, and threw a crowd of fresh passengers, with
trunks and carpet-bags numberless, on board. The traveller of taste
always feels himself instinctively drawn to one object out of the
thousand, and my observation was fixed on one foreign-featured female,
who sat in her wherry wrapt up in an envelope of furs and possessing a
pair of most lustrous eyes.

A sallow Italian, who stood near me, looking over the side of the
vessel, exclaimed, FANNI PELLMELLO, and the agility with which she
sprang up the steps was worthy of the name of that most celebrated
daughter of the muse who presides over dancing, as the opera critics
have told us several million times.

The sallow Italian was passed with a smile of recognition, which put him
in good spirits at once. Nothing vivifies the tongue of a foreigner like
the memory of the _Coulisses_, and he over-flowed upon me with the
history of this terrestrial Terpsichore. It happened that he was in Rome
at the time of that memorable levee at which Fanny, in all her
captivations, paid her obeisance at the Vatican; an event which
notoriously cost a whole coterie of princesses the bursting of their
stay-laces, through sheer envy, and on whose gossip the _haut ton_ of
the Eternal City have subsisted ever since.

The Italian, in his rapture, and with the vision of the danseuse still
shining before him at the poop, began to _improvise_ the presentation.
All the world is aware that Italian prose slides into rhyme of
itself,--that all subjects turn to verse in the mind of the Italian, and
that, when once on his Pegasus, he gallops up hill and down, snatches at
every topic in his way, has no mercy on antiquity, and would introduce
King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, dancing a quadrille with Prince
Albert and Queen Victoria.


THE PRESENTATION.

    The month was September,
    The day I remember,
        (Twas the _cong_ of Clara Novello),
    I saw troops under arms,
    Dragoons and gendarmes,
        Saluting sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    At St Peters last chime
    A chorus sublime
        (By-the-by, from Rossinis Otello),
    Was sung by Soprani,
    In homage to Fanny,
        The light footed Fanny Pellmello.

    As she rushd on their gaze,
    The Swiss-guard in amaze,
        Thought they might as well stand a Martello;
    All their muskets they droppd,
    On their knees they all poppd,
        To worship sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    To describe the _danseuse_,
    Is too much for _my_ muse;
        But if ever I fight a duello,
    Or quarrel at mess,
    It will be to possess
        Such a jewel as Fanny Pellmello.

    On her brow a tiara,
    Like the ladys in Lara,
        Or a portrait of thine, Biandello;
    With a twist and a twirl,
    All diamond and pearl,
        In bounded sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    All the men in the cowls,
    Were startled like owls,
        When the sunbeam first darts in their dell, O;
    As she flashd on their eyes,
    All were dumb with surprise--
        All moon-struck with Fanny Pellmello.

    As she waltzed through the hall,
    None heard a foot fall,
        All the chamberlains stood in a spell, O;
    While, silent as snow,
    She revolved on her toe,
        A la Psyche--sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    _Whom_ she knelt to within
    I cant say, for my sin;
        Those are matters on which I dont dwell, O;
    But I _know_ that a Queen
    Was nigh bursting with spleen
        At the diamonds of Fanny Pellmello.

    Were I King, were I Kaiser,
    Id have perishd to please her,
        Or dared against all to rebel, O;
    Id have barterd a throne
    To be bone of thy bone,
        Too exquisite Fanny Pellmello.

    If Paris had seen
    Her _pas seul_ on the green,
        When the goddesses came to his cell, O,
    Forgetting the skies,
    Hed have handed the prize
        To all-conquering Fanny Pellmello.

    Achilles of Greece
    Though famed for caprice,
        Would have left Greek and Trojan _in bello_,
    Cut country and king,
    And gone off on the wing
        To his island with Fanny Pellmello.

    Alexander the Great,
    Though not over sedate,
        And a lover of more than Ill tell, O,
    Would have learnd to despise
    All his Persians black eyes,
        And been faithful to Fanny Pellmello.

    Marc Antonys self
    Would have laid on the shelf
        His Egyptian so merry and mellow;
    Left his five hundred doxies,
    And found all their proxies
        In one, charming Fanny Pellmello.

    The renownd Julius Csar,
    With nose like a razor,
        And skull smooth and bright as a shell, O,
    Would his sword have laid down,
    Or pilferd a crown,
        At thy bidding, sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    His nephew Augustus,
    Not famous for justice,
        (Unless when the gout made him bellow,)
    His nose would have curld
    At the pomps of the world,
        For a cottage with Fanny Pellmello.

    The Emperor Tiberius,
    (A rascal nefarious,)
        Though all things on earth he would sell, O,
    Would have bid Rome adieu,
    To the Alps flown with you,
        And playd shepherd to Fanny Pellmello.

    That Bluebeard, young Nero,
    (Not much of a hero,
        For a knave earth has scarce seen his fellow,)
    Though his wife he might smother,
    Or hang up his mother,
        Would have worshippd sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    Nay, Alaric the Goth,
    Though he well might be loath
        His travelling baggage to swell, O,
    Would have built you a carriage,--
    Perhaps offerd marriage,--
        And marchd off with Fanny Pellmello.

    Fat Leo the Pope,
    In tiara and cope,
        Who the magic of beauty knew well, O,
    Would have craved your permission
    For your portrait, by Titian,
        As Venus--sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    The Sultan Mahmood
    Who the Spahis subdued,
        And mowd them like corn-fields so yellow,
    Would have sold his Haram,
    And made his salm
        At thy footstool, sweet Fanny Pellmello.

    Napoleon le Grand
    Would have sued for thy hand,
        Before from his high horse he fell, O;
    Hed have thought Josephine
    Was not fit to be seen,
        By thy beauties, sweet Fanny Pellmello.

----But the Thames, like the world, is full of changes. As the steamer
ran close in under the right shore, I observed a small creek, as
overgrown with sedge, as silent and as lonely as if it had been hid in a
corner of Hudsons Bay. It was once called Julius Csars bath, from the
tradition, that when marching at the head of the Tenth Legion, on a
visit to Cleopatra, then resident in Kent! he ordered his whole brigade
to wash the dust from their visages preparatory to appearing before her
majesty and her maids of honour. But this was the age of romance. An
unwashed age followed, and the classical name gave way to the exigencies
of things. The creek was called the Condemned Hole, and was made the
place for impounding vessels caught in the act of smuggling, which were
there secured, like other malefactors, in chains. It may not unnaturally
be concluded, that the spot was unpopular to the tribe of gallant
fellows, who had only followed the example of Greek, Saxon, Dane, and
Norman; and who saw the beloved companions of many a daring day and
joyous night (for if the sailor loves his ship, the smuggler adores her)
laid up under sentence of firewood. By that curious propensity, which
makes the fox so often fix his burrow beside the kennel, the surrounding
shore was the favourite residence of the smuggler; and many a
broad-shouldered hero, with a visage bronzed by the tropic sun, and a
heart that would face a lion, a fire-ship, or any thing but his wife in
a rage, was seen there taking his sulky rounds, and biting his thumb
(the approved style of insult in those days) at the customhouse
officers, who kept their uneasy watch on board. With some the ruling
passion was so strong, that they insisted on being buried as near as
possible to the spot, and a little churchyard was thence established,
full of epitaphs of departed gallantry and desperate adventure--a sort
of Buccaneer Valhalla, with occasional sculptures and effigies of the
sleepers below.

Among those the name of Jack Bradwell lived longest. The others
exemplified what Horace said of the injustice of fame, they wanted a
poet to immortalize them; but Jack took that office on himself, and
gave the world an _esquisse_ of his career, in the following rough
specimen of the Deptford muse of 1632:--


EPITAPH.

    Fulle thirtie yeares, I lived a smuggler bolde,
    Dealing in goode Schiedam and Englishe golde.
    My hande was open, and my hearte was lighte;
    My owners knew my worde was honour brighte.
    In the West Indies, too, for seven long yeares,
    I stoutlie foughte the Dons and the Mounseers.
    Commander of the tight-built sloop, the Sharke,
    Late as the owle, and early as the larke,
    I roamed the sea, nor cared for tide or winde,
    And left the Guarda Costas all behinde.
    Until betrayed by womans flattering tongue,
    In San Domingo my three mates were hung.
    I shot the Judge, forsook the Spanish Maine,
    And to olde Englande boldlie sailed againe.
    Was married thrice, and think it rather harde,
    That I should lie alone in this churchyarde.

But the march of mind is fatal to sentiment. A few years ago all
vestiges of Jack were swept away. A neighbouring tanner had taken a
liking to the spot, purchased it, planted his pits in it, and carried
off Jacks monument for a chimney-piece!

----But what hills are those edging the horizon, green, soft, and sunny.
I hear a burst of sonorous bells--

    Over this wide-watered shore,
    Swinging slow with sullen roar.

No; Miltons bells are monastic; the solemn clang of some huge
cathedral, calling the brethren to vespers, and filling the air with the
melancholy pomp of the antique cloister.--These are gay, glad,
tumultuous, a clang of joy. It is the Queens accession. Flags are
flying on every ship and steeple, and I hear a distant cannonade. The
guns of Woolwich are firing in honour of the day.

And what palace is looming on my right? Greenwich Hospital. A faade
worthy of Greece; ranges of Corinthian columns; vast courts expanding in
front; groves and green hills in the rear; and on the esplanade, a whole
battalion of one-legged or one-armed heroes, formed in line, and, as we
arrive, giving three cheers to the glory of her Majesty.

I leave the chroniclers to tell, that this noble establishment was
founded by William the Dutchman, of freedom-loving and French-hating
memory; that the call for public munificence was answered, as such calls
always are, by England; and that at this hour it pensions nearly forty
thousand as brave veterans as any in the world.

What magnitude of benevolence was ever equal to this regal and national
benefaction? In what form could public gratitude have ever been more
nobly displayed? Or by what means, uniting the highest charity to the
most just recompense, could comfort have been more proudly administered
to the declining days of the British seaman. In the long course of a
hundred and fifty years, what thousands, and tens of thousands, must
have been rescued, by this illustrious benevolence, from the unhappiness
of neglected old age! To what multitudes of brave old hearts must it
have given comfort in their distant cottages, and what high
recollections must the sight of its memorials and trophies revive in the
men who fought under Rodney and Howe, St. Vincent and Nelson! Those are
the true evidences of national greatness. Those walls are our witnesses
to posterity, that their fathers had not lived in vain. The shield of
the country thrown over the sailor and the soldier, against the chances
of the world in his old age, is the emblem of a grander supremacy than
ever was gained by even its irresistible spear.

----But the steamer has made a dash to the opposite bank, and we glide
along the skirts of a small peninsula, marked by a slender stone pillar,
where the border of Essex begins.

At this spot, a couple of hundred years ago, a mayor of London had been
hanged; for what reason, Elkanah Settle, the city laureate, does not
aver, further than that wise people differed much on the
subject,--some imagining that it was for bigamy; others, that it was
for having, at a great banquet given to the king by the corporation of
spectacle-makers, mistaken the royal purse for his own; but the chief
report being, that he was hanged for the bad dinners which he gave to
the common-councilmen. The laureate proceeds to say, that at this spot,
whenever the mayor of London went down with the Companies in their
visitation of the boundaries, the barges all made a solemn stop. The
mayor, (he was not yet a lord,) with all the aldermen, knelt on the
deck, and the chief chaplain, taking off his cap, repeated this
admonition:--

            Mister Mayor, Mister Mayor,
            Of a sinners death beware.
            Liveth virtue, liveth sin
            Not without us, but within.
            Man doth never think of ill,
            While he feedeth at his will.
            None doth seek his neighbours coin,
            When he seeth the sirloin.
            No man toucheth purse or life,
            While he thus doth use his knife.
            Savoury pie and smoking haunch
            Make the hungry traitor staunch.
            Claret spiced, and Malvoisie,
            From ill Spirits set us free,
            Better far than axe or sword
            Is the Citys well filled board.
            Think of him once, hanging there,
            Mister Mayor, Mister Mayor,
    _Chorus._--Beware, Beware, Beware!

The various corporate bodies chanted the last line with unanimous
devotion; the mayor and aldermen then rose from their knees, and the
whole pageant moved on to Blackwall to DINE.

Who has not heard of Blackwall? more fashionable for three months in the
year than Almacks itself for the same perishable period; fuller than
Bond Street, and with as many charming taverns as Regent Street contains
Ruination shops, (so called by Lady J. the most _riante_ wit of the
day,) those shops where one can purchase every thing that nobody wants,
and that few can pay for. Emporiums, as they name themselves, brilliant
collections of all that is dazzling and delightful, from a filigree
tooth-pick, up to a service of plate for a royal visitation.

Blackwall is a little city of taverns, built by white-bait, as the
islands in the South Sea are built by the coral insect. The scenery is a
marsh, backed by the waters of a stagnant canal, and lined with
whitewashed warehouses. It is in fact a transfer of Wapping,
half-a-dozen miles down the Thames. But Blackwall disdains the
picturesque; it scorns exterior charms, and devotes itself to the solid
merits of the table, and to dressing white-bait with a perfection
unrivalled, and unrivalable in the circumference of the terrestrial
globe.

Blackwall deserves to be made immortal, and I gave it a passport to
posterity, in an Ode.


ODE TO BLACKWALL.

    Let me sing thy praise, Blackwall!
      Paradise of court and city,
    Gathering in thy banquet-hall
      Lords and cockneys--dull, and witty.
    Spot, where ministers of state,
      Lay aside their humbug all;
    Water-souchy, and white-bait,
      Tempting mankind to Blackwall.

    Come, ye Muses, tuneful Nine,
      Whom no Civil List can bribe,
    Tell me, who come here, to dine,
      All the great and little tribe,
    Who, as summer takes its rounds,
      Oer Whitechapel, or Whitehall,
    From five shillings to five pounds,
      Club for dinner at Blackwall.

    There the ministerial _Outs_,
      There the ministerial _Ins_,
    One an emblem of the pouts,
      Tother emblem of the grins;
    All, beneath thy roof, are gay,
      Each forgetting rise or fall,
    Come to spend _one_ honest day,----
      All good fellows, at Blackwall.

    There I see an old Premier,
      Very like a Lord at nurse,
    Rather _near_, rather near,
      Dangling a diminishd purse.
    Grieving for the days gone by,
      When he had a house of call,
    Every day his fish and pie,
      Gratis--_not_ like thine, Blackwall.

    There I see an Irish brow,
      Bronzed with blarney, hot with wine,
    Markd by nature for the plough,
      Practising the Superfine.
    Mumbling oer a courtly speech,
      Dreaming of a palace Ball,
    Things not _quite_ within his reach,
      Though _quite asy_ at Blackwall.

    There the prince of Exquisites!
      Oer his claret looking sloppy,
    (All the ladies know, he writes,
      Bringing down the price of poppy,
    Spoiling much his scented paper,
      Making books for many a stall,)
    Sits, with languid smile, Lord Vapour,
      Yawning through thy feast, Blackwall.

    By him yawning sits, Earl Patron,
      Well to artists (_too_ well) known.
    Generous as a workhouse matron,
      Tender-hearted as a stone:
    Laughing at the pair, Lord Scoffer
      Whispers faction to F--x M--le.
    _Asking_ an official offer,
      _Ainsi va le monde_ Blackwall.

    But, whence comes that storm of gabble,
      Piercing casement, wall, and door,
    All the screaming tongues of Babel?
      Tis the Diplomatic corps,
    Hating us with all their souls,
      If the knaves have souls at all.
    Id soon teach them other _roles_,
      Were I Monarch of Blackwall.

    Then, I hear a roar uproarious!
      ----There a Corporation dine,
    Some are tipsy, some are glorious,
      Some are bellowing for wine;
    Some for all their sins are pouting,
      Some beneath the table fall;
    Some lie singing, some lie shouting,--
      Now, farewell to thee, Blackwall.

----Stopped for five minutes at the handsome pier, waiting for the
arrival of the railway passengers from London. The scene was animated;
the pier crowded with porters, pie-men, wandering minstrels, and that
ingenious race, who read moral lessons to country gentlemen with their
breeches pockets open, and negligent of their handkerchiefs.

----Stepped on shore, and, tempted by the attractions of one of the
taverns, ordered a bottle of claret, on the principle of the
parliamentary machines for cleansing the smoke-conveying orifices of our
drawing-rooms. The inconceivable quantity of fuliginous material, which
I had swallowed in my transit down the river, would have stifled the
voice of a _prima donna_. The claret gave me the sense of a recovered
faculty, and as I inhaled, with that cool feeling of enjoyment which
salutes the man of London with a consciousness that sea-breezes are in
existence, I had leisure to glance along a vista of superb saloons,
which would have better suited a Pasha of Bagdad, than the payers of the
income tax in the dingiest and mightiest city of the known world.

Yet all was not devoted to the selfish principle. In a recess at the end
of the vista was a small bust--a sort of votive offering to the memory
of Samuel Simpson, formerly a waiter in this tavern for the space of
fifty years, this bust having been here placed by his grateful master,
Thomas Hammersley.

I am proud to have seen, and shall be prouder to rescue, the names of
both those Blackwall worthies from oblivion. They have long slept
without their fame; for the bust is dated A.D. 1714, the year which
closed the existence of that illustrious queen, Anna, whose name, as
Swift rather saucily observed, like her friendships,

    Both backward and forward was always the _same_.

An honour shared in succeeding ages only by the amiable Lord Glenelg.

But inscribed on the pedestal was an epitaph, which I transferred to my
memoranda.


EPITAPH.

    Bacchus! thy wonders fill the wondering world!
    Thrones in the dust have by thy cups been hurld.
    Yet, still thou hadst for mankind _one_ surprise:
    There was _one_ honest drawer! and here he lies.
    Sam Simpson, of the Swan, who, forced to wink
    At drinking hard in others, did _not_ drink.
    A man who, living all his life by sots,
    Yet fairly drew, and fairly filld his pots.
    Steady and sure, his easy way held on,
    Nor let his chalk score _two_, when called for _one_.
    If mans best study is his fellow man,
    Reader, revere this hero of the Can.
    Twere well for kings, if many a king had been
    Like him who sleeps beneath yon Churchyard-green.

There is nothing new under the sun, saith Solomon; and as the late
Lord Mayor said, I am quite of Solomons opinion. Here is Crabbe,
fifty years before he was born. Here is his pomp and his particularity;
his force and his facility; his pungency and his picturesque. Is the
theory of transmigration true? and has the Blackwall tavern-keeper only
reappeared in the Rutlandshire parson? Let the antiquarians settle it
among them. I leave it to occupy the life of some future Ritson, to
poison some future Stephens with his own ink; and to give the whole race
of the Malones the shadow of an excuse for their existence in this
world.

But, I hear the snort of the locomotive; I see the cloud of steam
rushing towards the pier. The bell rings, the chaos of trunks and
passengers is rolled on board. I follow, and Blackwall fades in the
distance, as the poets say, like a dream of departed joys.

----Came in sight of a promontory, Purfleet, flanked by an immense row
of dark-roofed ominous-looking buildings,--these are the gunpowder
depts of the navy and army of the empire. I pretend to no exclusive
poltroonery; but I must acknowledge that I highly approved of the speed
which carried us past them. If they had blown up at the moment, in what
region of the atmosphere should we have been, steamer and all, in five
seconds after. Yet, how many things might have turned our whole cargo
into gas and carbon at the instant? a flash of lightning; the wire of a
Voltaic machine, apparently as harmless as a knitting needle in the
hands of an old spinster; the spark of a peasants pipe; the scrape of a
hob-nailed shoe! Within a hundred yards of us there lay, in grim
repose, a hundred thousand barrels of gunpowder. We might have lighted
them from the sparks of our funnel, and committed an involuntary suicide
on the most comprehensive scale.

But we should not have perished unknown. As the maid, in Schillers
famous Monologue, sings,--

    Even in the solitudes
    Of the Transatlantic woods,
    Where the elk and bison stalk,
    Men of that dark day should talk.
    Old men by their fireside sitting,
    Maidens in the sunset knitting,
    Still should think of that dark day.
    Till the world itself grew gray.

If the magazine at Purfleet were to explode, the Thames would be routed
out of its bed, and carried into Tunbridge Wells; Woolwich would be a
cinder, Gravesend an ash-pit, Chatham a cemetery, Blackwall a nonentity,
the Tunnel a tomb, and one half of the mighty metropolis itself but a
recollection.

Yet human beings actually _live_ at Purfleet! actually eat, drink, and
sleep, with this volcano beside their pillows; Essex picnics are eaten
within sight of this earth-shaker. Nay, balls have been given; and
creatures, calling themselves rational, have danced quadrilles, with the
salient temerity of the incurably insane. What a short-sighted and
saltatory thing is human nature!

Among the changes produced by the new importation of passengers, it was
my fate to be placed beside the Authoress; who did me the honour of
thinking me worthy of her notice, and who rapidly admitted me into the
most unbounded confidence, respecting the merits of her own
performances, and the demerits of all the world of authorship besides. I
listened with the most profound submission; only filling up the pauses,
when she stopped to take breath; by a gesture of acquiescence, or that
most valuable of all words, Yes. She had met me, in a hundred
places, where I was not conscious of having ever been; and recognised
my style in a hundred volumes which I had never read. In short, she was
charmed with me; and confessed, after half an hour of the most
uninterrupted eloquence on her side; that though evidently cautious of
giving an opinion, I should thenceforth be ranked by her, among the
most brilliant conversationalists of the day.

Must I acknowledge, that I forgot as expeditiously as I learned, and,
excepting _one_ recollection, all was a blank by dinner time.

But we _had_ met once before, in a scene, which, on afterwards casually
turning over some papers, I found recorded on those scraps of foolscap,
and in those snatches of rhyme, which argue, I am afraid, a desultory
mind. So be it. I disdain to plead not guilty to the charge of
perfection. I make no attempt to exonerate myself of the cardinal
virtues. I write poetry, because it is better behaved than prose; and
in this feeling I give the history to a sympathizing world.


THE POETS AUCTION.

    As I strolld down St. Jamess, I heard a voice cry,
    The auctions beginning, come buy, sir, come buy.
    On a door was a crape, on a wall a placard,
    Proclaiming to earth, it had lost its last bard.
    In I rambled, and, climbing a dark pair of stairs,
    Found _all_ the blue-stockings, all giggling in pairs;
    The crooked of tongue, and the crooked of spine,
    _All_ ugly as Hecate, and old as the Nine.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    There were A, B, C, D,s--all your ladies of letters,
    Well known for a trick of abusing their betters;
    With their _beaus_! the old snuffling and spectacled throng,
    Who haunt their _soirees_ for liqueurs and souchong;
    There was dear Mrs. Blunder, who scribbles Astronomy--
    Miss Babble, who owns the sweet Tales on Gastronomy;
    Miss Claptrap, who writes the Tractarian Apologies,
    With a host of old virgins, all stiff in the ologies.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    There sat, grim as a ghoul, the sublime Mrs. Tomb,
    With rouged Mrs. Lamp, like a corpse in full bloom,
    And the hackney-coach tourist, old Mrs. Bazaar,
    Who lauds every ass with a ribbon and star;
    Describes every tumble-down Schloss, brick by brick,
    And quotes her flirtations with dear Metternich;
    With those frolicsome ladies who visit harms,
    And swallow, like old Lady Mary, their qualms.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    There was, dressd _ la Chickasaw_, Miss Chesapeak,
    Who makes novels as naked as nymphs from the Greek;
    Mrs. Myth, with a chin like a Jews upon Hermon;
    Mrs. Puff, who reviewed the archbishops last sermon;
    Miss Scamper, who runs up the Rhine twice a-year,
    To tell us how Germans smoke pipes and swill beer.
    All the _breakfasting_ set: for the bard drew a line,
    And askd the Magnificoes only, to dine.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    There stood old Viscount Bungalow, hiding the fire,
    As blind as a beetle, the great picture-buyer;
    With Earl Dilettante, stone-deaf in both ears,
    An opera-fixture these last fifty years;
    Little Dr. de Rougemont, the famous Mesmeric,
    Who cures all the girls by a touch of hysteric;
    And Dean Dismal, court-chaplain, whose pathos and prose
    Would beat Mesmer himself at producing a doze.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    And there, with their eyes starting out of their sockets,
    A tribe, whose light fingers I keep from my pockets,
    _Messieurs les Attaches_, all grin and moustache,
    With their souls in full scent for our heiresses cash.
    Four eminent lawyers, with first-rate intentions
    Of living the rest of their lives on their pensions,
    With six heads of colleges, hurried to town,
    To know if Sir Bob, or Lord John, would go down.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    Heres a volume of verse, was the auctioneers cry.
    What! nobody bids!--Tom, throw that book by.
    Though it cost the great author one half of his life,
    Unplagued (I beg pardon) with children or wife.
    Heres an Epic in embryo, still out of joint,
    Heres a bushel of Epigrams wanting the point,
    With a lot of _Impromptus_, all finished to fit
    A dull diner-out with _extempore_ wit.                    Tol de rol.

    Heres a sonnet, inscribed To the Shade of a Sigh.
    A Lament on The Death of a Favourite Fly;
    And, well worth a shilling, that sweetest of lays--
    To the riband that tied up a Duchesss stays.
    Heres a note from a Young-England Club, for a _loan_,
    Lord B----s famous speech on The Sex of Pope Joan,
    With the bards private budget of H--ll--d House stories,
    Of Tories turned Whigs, and of Whigs _turning_ Tories.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    What! nobody bids! Must I shut up the sale?
    Well; take all the verses at so much per bale!
    I come to the autographs:--One from _the_ Duke,
    Assigning the cause for cashiering his cook;
    A missive from Byr-n,--a furious epistle,--
    Which proves that a bard may pay dear for his whistle;
    With letters from geniuses, sunk in despair
    By the doctrine, that Poets should live upon air.
                                                              Tol de rol.

    A scrap from Bob Burns, to d--n the Excise,
    Where they sent him to perish--(a word to the wise;)
    A line from Sir W-lt-r, in anguish and debt,
    To thank his good king for _what never came yet_;
    A song from the minstrel of minstrels, T-m M--re,
    To laud his dear country for keeping him poor;
    With a prayer from old Coleridge, in hope that his bones
    Might escape all the humbug of National stones!
                                                              Tol de rol.

    Heres a note to T-m C-mpb-ll, (indorsed, _From a Peer_,)
    To mulct Income-tax from his hundred a-year;
    Pinnd up with a note from his _Chef_ to his Grace,
    That he must have five hundred, or throw up his place;
    Heres an epitaph written by Haydons last pen--
    Poh! Genius may die in a ditch or a den!
    The country wants none of it, female or male,
    So, as no one bids sixpence, Ill shut up the sale.
                                                              Tol de rol.




PRUSSIAN MILITARY MEMOIRS.[6]


_Vieux soldat, vieille bte_, is a French proverb, implying an
exceedingly low estimate of the mental acuteness of the veteran soldier.
We do not know that English soldiers are quicker witted than French
ones; better educated we know they are not, except, as we love to
believe, in what pertains to push of bayonet. But in how much more
flattering terms is couched the popular opinion in this country,
concerning the capacity and wit of the man of musket and sabre. On this
side the Channel, to be an old soldier implies something remarkably
knowing--a man quite up to snuff, and a trifle above it. Hes too old
a soldier for that, signifies that the _he_ is a very sharp and wary
dog, the last fellow to be taken in or made a fool of. He came the old
soldier over me, is a common cant acknowledgment of having met more
than ones match--of having been overreached or outwitted. Other similar
phrases are there, familiar to most ears, and unnecessary to cite. They
concur to show a prevailing belief, that a long habit of scarlet--we
mean no pun--and familiarity with pipeclay, or else the many
vicissitudes and much experience of life they argue, polish the
soldiers faculties to a particularly sharp point, and remove from his
character each vestige of the unsophisticated, as effectually as he
himself, with sand and oil-rag, would rub all stain of rust from
scabbard or barrel. There is exaggeration in this notion. It is not
unusual to find in veteran soldiers, a dash of _naive_ simplicity, even
of childish credulity, co-existent with much shrewdness and knowledge of
the world. For this incongruity, let physiologists account; we shall not
investigate its causes. The remark applies to soldiers of most
countries; for, with certain shades of difference, derivable from
climate, race, and national customs, the soldier is the same every
where. The original material is various, but the moulds in which it is
fashioned are to a great extent identical. Divide the whole population
of Europe according to trades and professions, and in the military class
shall the least diversity be found.

We strongly suspect that Baron von Rahden, whose Wanderings we noticed
in a previous number of this Magazine, and from whose agreeable pages we
propose again to glean, is a fine example of the compound character
above described. On duty, none more matter-of-fact than he, none more
prompt and keen in conduct and language; but, suspend the activity of
camps, and dangers of the fight, remove him for a moment from his
battalions ranks and the routine of service, and behold! he builds up
all idyl about a peasant girl and cow; or, better still, and more fully
confirming our opinion, treats you with all gravity and deep conviction
to a spice of the supernatural. Of his ghostly gambols we will forthwith
give a specimen.

It was in the month of October, 1812, that a party of young cadets, of
whom the baron was one, left Breslin for Berlin, there to pass their
examination as officers. The ordeal to which the aspirants hastened was
severe and dreaded, and the journey was no very soothing preparation for
the rigours of the examiners. German roads and diligences were far less
respectable then than now, and the lumbering carriage in which the
cadets, in company with Polish Jews, market-women, baskets, bags, and
blankets, prosecuted their journey, was a bone-setter of most inhuman
construction. Its wooden lining was clouted with nails, compelling the
travellers to preserve a rigid perpendicular, lest a sudden jolt should
diminish the number of their teeth, or increase that of the apertures of
their heads. About midnight this modern barrel of Regulus reached a
large town, and paused to deposit passengers. The halt was of some
duration, and the cadets dispersed themselves about the streets. One of
them, designated by the Baron under the initial Von L., did not
re-appear till the post-horn had sounded its fourth signal, when he came
up in haste and agitation and threw himself into the carriage, which
immediately drove off. The next day this youth, who had been silent and
gloomy since the halt of the previous night, was taken grievously ill, a
misfortune attributed by his comrades to a plentiful breakfast of sour
milk and sausages. On their return from Berlin, however, Von L., whose
health was still delicate, and depression visible, showed, on passing
the scene of their midnight halt, symptoms of uneasiness so strong as to
excite suspicion that his illness had had some extraordinary cause. That
this suspicion was well founded, he, at a later period, confessed to
Baron von Rahden, who tells the story in his friends own words.

Being very thirsty, said Von L., I lingered at the great fountain on
the market-place, and there I was presently joined by a young peasant
girl, carrying a great earthen pitcher. We soon became great friends. It
was too dark for me clearly to distinguish the features of my little
Rebecca, but I nevertheless readily complied with her tittered
invitation to escort her home. Arm in arm we wandered through the narrow
by-streets, till we reached a large garden, having a grated door, which
stood half open. Here the damsel proposed that we should part, and
nimbly evaded my attempt to detain her. She ran from me with suppressed
laughter. I eagerly followed, soon overtook her, and, by flattery and
soothing words, prevailed on her to sit down beside me upon a bank of
soft turf in the shadow of overhanging trees. Here, for a short quarter
of an hour, we toyed and prattled, when I was roused from my boyish
love-dream by the distant sound of the post-horn. I sprang to my feet;
at the same instant, with a peal of shrill wild laughter, my companion
disappeared. My light and joyous humour suddenly checked, I looked about
me. I was now better able to distinguish surrounding objects; and with
what indescribable horror did I recognise in the supposed garden a
churchyard, in the turf bank a grave, in the sheltering foliage a
cypress. And now all that related to the maiden seemed so mysterious,
her manner occurred to me as so strange and unearthly! How I found out
the gate of the cemetery, I know not. I remember stumbling over the
graves and rushing in the direction whence the postilions horn still
sounded, pursued by echoes of scornful laughter. Shuddering and
breathless, I at length rejoined my comrades, but the impression made
upon me by that nights adventure has never been effaced.

So much for the Barons friend. Now for the Baron himself, who relates
all this, be it observed, with a most commendable solemnity, implying
conviction of the supernatural nature of his comrades adventure. With
reference to this unnatural occurrence, he says, I frequently met my
friend during the war and the early years of the peace, but never
without that incident recurring to me, and the more so, as from that day
forward, melancholy settled upon Von L.s manly and handsome
countenance. He strove, with indifferent success, as it appeared to me,
to combat his depression by dissipation and worldly pleasures; but the
expression of his dark eye was ever one of severe mental suffering. He
never married or partook of the peaceful joys of domestic existence.
During the War of Liberation he distinguished himself by daring courage
and reckless exposure of his life, was repeatedly wounded, and died
suddenly at the age of thirty, in the full bloom and strength of
manhood. He is still well remembered as a gallant officer and thorough
soldier.

Whilst on a visit to the town of N., a few years ago, my evening walk
frequently led me, in company with a much esteemed friend, to the
churchyard where Von L., after his short and melancholy career, had at
last found repose. During one of these walks, my companion related to me
the following story:--At the hour of twelve, upon three successive
nights, the sentry, whose lonely post was adjacent to the cemetery, had
challenged the rounds, as they approached through the deep shadow of an
arched gateway. To his question, Who makes the rounds? was each time
replied, in deep sepulchral tones, Captain von L. and at the same
instant the visionary patrol vanished. So runs the guard-room tale.
Which the Baron is sufficiently reasonable to treat as such, although he
assures his readers that, even after an interval of three-and-thirty
years, he does not write down the details of his melancholy friends
adventure with the mysterious _aquaria_ without something very like a
shudder. In a collection of _Mahrchen_ this very German story might have
been accepted as an endurable fragment of imaginative _diablerie_, but
coming thus in the semi-historical autobiography of a hero of Leipzig
and Waterloo, and Knight of the Iron Cross, it certainly subjects the
writer to the application of the uncomplimentary French proverb already
cited.

As a boy--and during his German and French campaigns, he was but a
boy--Baron von Rahden showed an odd mixture of the manly and the
childish. Cool and brave in the fight, bearing wounds and hardship with
courage and fortitude, the loss of a trinket made him weep; an elder
comrades rebuke rendered him down-cast and unhappy as a whipped
school-boy. Scarcely had he joined his regiment, when he was admitted to
the intimacy of a Lieutenant Patzynski, an experienced officer and crack
duellist. It was a mode amongst the young officers, when sitting round
the punchbowl, to enter into contracts of brotherhood. The process was
exceedingly simple. The glasses clattered together, an embrace was
given, and thenceforward the partakers in the ceremony addressed each
other in the second person singular, in sign of intimacy and friendship.
Emboldened by the patronage of the formidable Patzynski, and heated by a
joyous repast, Von Rahden one day approached Lieutenant Merkatz, who was
considerably his senior both in rank and years, and proffered him the
fraternal embrace. With the greatest pleasure, my dear boy, replied
Merkatz, who had observed with some disgust the forward bearing of the
unfledged subaltern, but on one condition. You shall address me as
_Sie_, and I will call you _Er_. The former being the most respectful
style of address, the latter slighting and even contemptuous, only used
to servants and inferiors. Cowed by this unkind, if not undeserved
reproof, Von Rahden retreated in confusion. Subsequently he met many
unpleasant slights and rebuffs from Merkatz; but they did him good, and
his persecutor eventually became his warm friend. This, however, was not
till the recruit had proved his manhood in many a hot fight and sharp
encounter. Forward, said the stern Prussian soldier on the field of
Lutzen, when, borne back bleeding from the foremost line of skirmishers,
he met Von Rahden hurrying to replace him. Forward, boy! Yonder will
you find brothers! In the smoke of the battle, not in the fumes of the
orgie, were the esteem and friendship of Germanys tried defenders to be
conquered. After the battle of Kulm, Von Rahden bought a French watch,
part of a soldiers plunder; and his pride and delight in this trinket
were, according to his own confession, something quite childish. His
comrades, with whom he was a favourite, bore with his exultation.
Merkatz alone showed a disposition to check it. He had assumed the
character of a surly Mentor, resolved, apparently, to cure his young
comrade of his follies, and drill him into a man. He now assured Von
Rahden that if he did not leave off playing with, and displaying, his
watch, he would knock it out of his hand the very first opportunity.
This soon presented itself. Whilst bivouacking in the mountains of
Bohemia, the two officers chanced one night to be seated near each other
at the same fire, and Von Rahden, forgetting his companions menace,
repeatedly pulled out his watch, until Merkatz, with a blow of a stick,
shivered it to pieces. Although, in general, when my comrades jokes
displeased me, I was ready enough to answer them with my sabre, on this
occasion I was so astonished and grieved, that I burst into tears, and
retreated to my couch in the corner of the hut, where I sobbed myself to
sleep. This whimpering young gentleman, however, was the same, who,
only a few days previously, in the hottest moment of the battle of Kulm,
had led his men, encouraging them by voice and deed, up to the very
musket-muzzles of the parapeted Frenchmen, and who, twice already, had
been wounded amidst the foremost of the combatants. At the fight of May,
too, although that was somewhat later, his bravery was such as to
attract the notice of Prince Augustus of Prussia. The men of his
battalion were weary and exhausted by a hard days combat, when,
suddenly and unexpectedly, they were again ordered forward into a fierce
fire of artillery. They murmured and hesitated, and for a moment refused
to advance. Upon this occasion, I was fortunate enough to contribute,
by boyish and joyous humour, for which the men all liked me, and by my
contempt of danger, in restoring courage and confidence. Shot and shell
flew about us, and the younger soldiers were hard to keep in their
ranks. I ran forward thirty or forty paces to the front, and several
shells happening to fall close to me without bursting, I laughed at and
cut jokes upon them. At last the men laughed too, and came willingly
forward. Such little incidents occur in far less time than it takes to
tell of them. So it was here; but we had effected what we wanted--the
men were in better humour. I had no idea that Prince Augustus had
observed my behaviour, which was certainly rather juvenile; and when I
saw him standing near me, I was ashamed and drew back; but he called out
to me, and said, in a loud voice, Very good! very good! Lieutenant
Rahden, and then spoke a few words to Count Reichenbach. From that day
I found great favour with our illustrious general of brigade. The first
proof of it was the Iron Cross.

Von Rahdens final reconciliation with Merkatz took place under the
enemys fire. It was the day after Montmirail, and Bluchers _corps
darme_, after gallantly protecting Ziethens beaten troops from
Gronchys cavalry, itself retreated towards Etoges. At about half a
league from that place, whilst marching along a road that ran between
vineyards, the French tirailleurs attacked them, and cavalry patrols
came in to inform the Field-marshal that Etoges was occupied by the
enemy. But the Baron shall tell the story himself.

In darkness, surrounded by foes, ignorant of the ground we manuvred
upon, a handful of men against a powerful force, and our old Father
Blucher, with the elite of his generals, in danger of being taken--all
this made up an alarming picture. But the greater the need, the prompter
the deed. In an instant it was decided to throw out skirmishers into the
vineyards, whilst the battalions, formed close and compact round the
Field-marshal, should cut their way along the road. Count Reichenbach
gave his orders accordingly; and his adjutant, Lieutenant Merkatz, who
sat chilled and weary upon his horse, turned mechanically to me, and
desired me to extend my skirmishers on the left of the road. This was
beyond a joke: I had been skirmishing the whole day, perpetually under
fire, and hard at work since nine in the morning. Tired to death, I had
been heartily glad to rejoin my battalion, and now I was ordered out
again into the cold dark night, and on the most uncertain service. All
my old grudge against Merkatz recurred to me, and, as it was not my turn
for the duty, I answered him in loud and marked tones, Order out
somebody else, and dont be too lazy to ride to the next company. When,
however, Count Reichenbach turned round, and with some displeasure
desired me to speak less loud in the neighbourhood of the
General-in-chief, I became more complying, and only argued that my large
cloak, which I carried rolled over my shoulder, would hinder me in the
vineyards. Give me the cloak here, replied Merkatz: I am freezing
upon my horse. What could I do? Time pressed: so venting my ill humour
in a few grumbling words, I threw my cloak to the adjutant, and hurried
with my skirmishers to the vineyard. I had taken but a few steps,
however, when an arm was thrown round me. It was that of Merkatz.
Listen, Rahden, said he; before we part, perhaps for ever, become my
brother for life, and let us forget all past unkindness. I replied by a
hearty embrace, for I had long esteemed Merkatz as one of the bravest of
my comrades, and, elated at the atonement he now made me for having
refused my friendship at the commencement of the previous campaign, I
pressed forward cheerfully into the fight.

The French cavalry had been several hours in possession of Etoges, had
removed the railings from the wells, and sawn the timbers of a bridge
which crossed a broad and muddy stream. As soon as the Prussians set
foot on it, it broke down, and an awful confusion ensued. The panic was
aggravated by the darkness, and by the fire of the enemy, who blazed at
the Allies from behind trees and houses. In attempting to jump the
stream, Von Rahden fell in, and all his efforts only sank him deeper in
the mud. A number of soldiers, who had also missed the leap, struggled
beside him, involuntarily wounding each other with their fixed bayonets.
Von Rahden gave himself up for lost. I uttered a short prayer, gave one
thought to my distant home, and awaited the death blow. My senses had
already half left me, when I heard a well-known voice exclaim,
Lieutenant, where are you? With a last effort I raised myself, and saw
Schmidt, my sergeant of skirmishers, peering down into the ditch. He
held out his musket. I seized it with the grasp of desperation, and the
brave fellow dragged me up. Barefoot, and covered with mud, I followed
in the stream of fugitives. So great was the hurry and disorder of the
flight, that if the enemy had sent a single squadron after us, thousands
of prisoners must have been taken. It seems incomprehensible that they
did not pursue; but I think I may safely affirm, that a young Russian
officer, whose name I do not know, saved the army by his presence of
mind. In a loud voice, he shouted several times, Barabanczek!
Barabanczek! which means a drummer. A number of drummers and buglers
gathered around him and beat and blew a charge. The French did not
suspect the stratagem; and supposing that reinforcements were coming up
under cover of the night, they would not risk, by a pursuit, the
advantage they had already gained. My friend, Merkatz, was amongst the
prisoners taken upon that disastrous evening; but he soon managed to
escape, leaving behind him, however, his own horse, and my warm and much
prized cloak.

A terrible campaign was that of 1813-14; and the man who had made it,
from Lutzen to Paris, might well style himself a veteran, though his
whole military career were comprised in the short ten months of its
duration. What incessant fighting! not occasional battles, with long
intervals, varied by insignificant skirmishes, but a rapid succession of
pitched and bloody fields. No rest or relaxation, or pleasant repose in
comfortable quarters, but short rations and the bivouacs hard couch as
sole solace for the weary and suffering soldier. The hardships of the
allied armies are briefly, but frequently and impressively adverted to
by the Baron von Rahden. As if the ravages of lead and steel were
insufficient, disease and exposure added their quota to the harvest of
death. Although in the height of summer, says the Baron, speaking of
the month of August, 1813, we had had, for three days past,
uninterrupted rains, and the fat black soil was so soaked, that our
progress was painfully difficult. We could bivouac only in meadows, and
on the uncut corn. In fallow or stubble fields we must have lain in mud.
We were very ill fed; the commissariat stores were far in rear, detained
in the mountain passes, and for several days our only nourishment
consisted of wild fruits, potatoes and turnips, which the men dug up in
the fields. Our clothes and equipment, to the very cartouch-boxes, were
wet through, and not a ray of sun, a tree or house, or even a bivouac
fire, was there for warmth or shelter. With vermin also, bequeathed to
them often by their Cossack allies, the Prussians were grievously
tormented. In our camp, by Chlumetz, in Bohemia, where we passed some
days, we had rain and other bivouac calamities to put up with. The straw
served out to us had already been slept upon; and the consequence was,
an invasion of our clothes and persons by certain small creeping things
of a very unpleasant description. Whether they were of Austrian or
Russian extraction I am unable to state; nor did it much matter: we
succeeded to them. Looking out of my hut one morning, I saw a man issue
from one of the straw-built sheds occupied by the soldiers, and run,
wringing his hands, to an adjacent wood. I followed him, to prevent
mischief, and recognised an old friend and fellow cadet, Von P. He was
in the greatest despair. The soldiers had turned him out of their
temporary abode. The poor fellow swarmed with vermin. I succeeded in
calming him, fetched him clean linen, and after a careful examination of
his clothes in a neighbouring oat-field, he returned with me to my hut,
which he thenceforward inhabited. Should the Russian commandant of the
Polish fortress of Czenstochau chance to read these pages, and remember
the above incident, let him give a friendly thought to his old brother
in arms, who will soon again have to speak of the brave Von P., of the
Second Silesian Regiment. If, in the rugged Bohemian mountains,
hardships were to be anticipated, in the plains of Champagne things
might have been expected to go better. If possible, they went worse. To
speak plainly, says the Baron, referring to the campaign in France,
which commenced very early in the year, filth and ordure were our
couch; rain, ice, and snow, our covering; half-raw cows flesh, mouldy
biscuits, and sour wine lees, our nourishment; for heart and mind, the
sole relaxation was shot, and blow, and stab. Some one has said, Make
war with angels for twenty years and they will become devils. To that I
add, Six months of such a life as we then led, and men would turn into
beasts. Little wonder if soldiers thus situated greedily seized each
brief opportunity of enjoyment. The cellars of Ai and Epernay paid heavy
tribute to the thirsty Northern warriors. We are told of one instance
where a whole division of the allied army was unable to march, and an
important military operation had to be suspended, in consequence of a
Pantagruelian debauch at a chateau near Chalons, where champagne
bottles, by tens of thousands, were emptied down Prussian and Muscovite
gullets. The sacking of their cellars, however, was not the only evil
endured at the hands of the invaders by the unlucky vine-growers. Wood
was scarce, the nights were very cold, and the sticks upon which the
vines were trained, were pulled up and used as fuel. Sometimes, in a
single night, many hundreds of thousands of these _echalas_ were thus
destroyed, every one of them being worth, owing to the hardness and
rarity of the wood required for them, at least two _sous_. Their second
visit to France hardly entered into the anticipations of the reckless
destroyers, or they would perhaps have had more consideration for that
years vintage.

From a host of anecdotes of Baron von Rahdens brother-officers, we
select the following as an interesting and characteristic incident of
Prussian camp-life three-and-thirty years ago. It is told in what the
Baron calls his poetical style:

My captain, a Pole by birth, was brave as steel, but harsh and rough as
the sound of his name. He was deficient in the finer feelings of the
heart, in philanthropy, and in a due appreciation of the worth of his
fellow-men. Although a good comrade to us young officers, he was a
tyrant to his inferiors. His envy and jealousy of his superiors he
barely concealed under an almost exaggerated courtesy. Such was Captain
von X.

It was the eve of the battle of Leipzig, and a violent gust of wind had
overthrown the fragile bivouac-huts, at that time our only protection
from the cold and wet of the October nights. The rain fell in torrents,
and, in all haste, the soldiers set to work to reconstruct their
temporary shelter. The more cunning and unscrupulous took advantage of
the prevailing confusion to consult their own advantage, without respect
to the rights of others. The objects which they coveted, and
occasionally pillaged, would, under other circumstances, have been of
little worth: they consisted of straw, branches, and stakes, invaluable
in the construction of our frail tenements. As in duty bound, our
military architects first built up the captains hut, within which he
took refuge, after ordering me to remain outside and preserve order. As
junior officer of the company, this fatigue-duty fairly fell to me, in
like manner as the first turn for an honourable service belonged to the
senior; but, nevertheless, I felt vexed at the captains order, and
could not help wishing him some small piece of ill luck. My wish was
very soon realized.

Our majors hut, more carefully and strongly constructed, had resisted
the hurricane: it stood close beside that of the captain. The major was
long since asleep and snoring; but his servant, a cunning, careful dog,
was still a-foot, and watched his opportunity to get possession of a
long bean-stick, to be used as an additional prop to the already solid
edifice under which his master slumbered. The unlucky marauder had not
remarked that this stake formed one of the supports of the captains
dormitory. He seized and pulled it violently, and down came the hut,
burying its inmate under the ruins. There was a shout of laughter from
the spectators of the downfal, and then the Pole disengaged himself from
the wreck, cursing awfully, and rushed upon the unfortunate fellow who
had played him the trick. Pale and trembling, the delinquent awaited his
fate; but his cry of terror brought him assistance from his master, who
suddenly stepped forth in his night-dress, a large gray cavalry cloak
thrown about him, and a white cloth bound round his head. The major was
an excellent and kind-hearted man, loved like a father by his men, but
subject to occasional fits of uncontrollable passion, which made him
lose sight of all propriety and restraint. Without investigation, he at
once took his servants side against the captain, in which he was
certainly wrong, seeing that his worthy domestic had been caught in the
very act of theft. He snatched the bean-stick from the mans hand: the
captain already grasped the other end; and, for some minutes, there they
were, major and captain, pulling, and tugging, and reeling about the
bivouac, not like men, but like a brace of unmannerly boys. Myself and
the soldiers were witnesses of this singular encounter. Accustomed to
regard our superiors with fear and respect, we now beheld them in the
most childish and ludicrous position. Astonishment kept us motionless
and silent. At last the captain made a violent effort to wrest the pole
from his antagonist: the major held firm, and resisted with all his
strength; when, suddenly, his opponent let go his hold, and our major, a
little round man, measured his length in the mud. In an instant he was
on his feet again. Throwing away the bean-stick, and stepping close up
to his opponent, To-morrow, said he, we will settle this like men:
here we have been fools; and you, captain, a malicious fool.

I accept your invitation with pleasure, replied the captain, and
trust our next meeting will be with bullets. But, for to-day, the pole
is mine. And he seized it triumphantly.

Certainly; yours to-day, retorted the major. To-morrow we will fight
it out upon my dirty cloak.

The morrow came, and the battle began, not, however, between major and
captain, but between French and Prussians. Silent we stood in deep dark
masses, listening to the music of the bullets. Firm and steady! was
the command of our little major--of the same man who, a few hours
before, had played so childish a part. Skirmishers were called in, and a
charge with the bayonet ordered. The foe abandoned his first position.
Animated by success, we attacked the second. Our battalion hurried on
from one success to another, and my gallant captain was ever the first
to obey, in the minutest particular, the orders of our famous little
major. The noble emulation between the two brave fellows was
unmistakeable. In their third position the French defended themselves
with unparalleled obstinacy, and our young soldiers, in spite of their
moral superiority, were compelled to recede. Forward, my fine fellows!
cried the major; Follow me, men! shouted the captain, and, seizing the
sinking standard, whose bearer had just been shot, he raised it on high,
and dashed in amongst the foe. With a tremendous Hurra! the whole line
followed, and Napoleons Vieille Garde was forced to a speedy retreat.

The major gazed in admiration at his bitter opponent of the preceding
day. Calling him to him, he clasped him in his arms. For a moment the
two men were enveloped in the cloak upon which they were to have fought.
Words cannot describe that scene. Suddenly a cannon-ball boomed through
the air, and, lo! they lay upon the ground, shattered and lifeless,
reconciliation their dying thought. The fight over, and our bivouac
established in a stubble-field, we paid then the last military honours.
Fifty men, all that remained of my company, followed their bodies, and a
tear stood in every eye as we consigned the gallant fellows to one
grave.

With bitter and ill-suppressed rage did the military portion of the
French nation, after a brief but busy campaign, see themselves compelled
to submission, their emperor an exile, their hearths intruded upon by
the foreigners who, at Jena and Wagram, Austerlitz and Marengo, had
quailed and fled before their conquering eagles. Resistance, in a mass,
was no longer to be thought of: the French army was crushed, crippled,
almost annihilated, but its individual members still sought
opportunities of venting their fury upon the hated victors. By sneer,
and slighting word, and insulting look, they strove to irritate and lure
them to the lists; and their provocations, even the more indirect ones,
rarely failed of effect. On the duelling-ground, as in the field, steady
German courage was found fully a match for the _brio_ and presumption of
these French _spadassins_. After the capitulation of Paris, Von Rahdens
regiment was sent into country-quarters at Amiens, and they were but a
few days in the town before the ill-smothered antipathy between Gaul and
German broke out into a flame.

When we were fairly installed in our quarters, and the first little
squabbles and disagreements between towns-people and soldiers had been
settled, chiefly by the good offices of the authorities, we officers
gave ourselves up to the pleasures of the place, amongst which a large
and elegant _caf_ was not to be forgotten. In this coffee-house the
tables were of marble, the walls covered with mirrors, the windows and
doors of plate-glass, in gilt frames. All was gold and glitter, and the
_dames de comptoir_ might, from their appearance, have been fashionable
ladies, placed there to lead the conversation. All this was very new and
attractive, and well calculated to dazzle us young men. Accordingly,
from early morn till late at night, hundreds of officers, of all arms,
sat in the _caf_, drinking, playing, and sighing.

Happening one forenoon to be orderly-officer, I received several
complaints from soldiers concerning the younger son of the family upon
which they were quartered. He had returned home only the day before, had
shown himself very unfriendly towards the men, and did his utmost to
irritate their other hosts against them. Upon inquiry, I found the
complaint to be just, and that a young and handsome man, of military
appearance, was doing all in his power to excite ill-will towards us.
After several warnings, which were unattended to, I was compelled to
arrest and put him in the guard-room, menacing him with further
punishment. This done, I joined my comrades at the _caf_.

That day our favourite place of resort presented an unusual aspect. A
regiment of French hussars, on its march westwards, had halted for the
night at Amiens, and upwards of twenty of the officers were now seated
in the coffee-house. There was a good deal of talk going on, but not so
much as usual; and the division between the different nations was
strongly marked. To the right the hussars had assembled, crowded round
three or four tables; on the other side of the saloon sat fifty or sixty
Prussian infantry officers. The situation was not the most agreeable,
and there was a mutual feeling of constraint. Presently there came to
the coffee-house (by previous arrangement, as I am fully persuaded) one
of those Italian pedlars, for the most part spies and thieves, of whom
at that time great numbers were to be met with in France and other parts
of the Continent. Stopping at the glazed door opening into the street,
he offered his wares for sale. Soon one of the hussar officers called to
him in excellent German, and asked him if he had any pocket-books to
sell. He wanted one, he said, to note down the anniversaries of the
battles of Jena, Austerlitz, &c. Although this inquiry was manifestly a
premeditated insult, we Prussians remained silent, as if waiting to see
what would come next. The pedlar supplied the demands of the Frenchman,
and was about to leave the room, when one of our officers, Lieutenant
von Sebottendorf, of the 23d infantry regiment, called to him in his
turn, and observed, in a loud voice, that he also required a
pocket-book, wherein to mark the battles of Rossbach, the Katzbach, and
Leipzig. The names of Rossbach and Leipzig served for a signal. As by
word of command, the hussars sprang from their chairs and drew their
long sabres; we followed their example, and bared our weapons, which for
the most part were small infantry swords. In an instant a mle began;
the French pressing upon Sebottendorf; we defending him. At the same
moment the hussar trumpets and our drums sounded and beat in the
streets. As officer of the day, those sounds called me away. With great
difficulty I got out of the caf, and hurried to the main-guard, which
was already menaced by the assembled hussars. I had just made my men
load with ball-cartridge--we had no other--when luckily several
companies came up and rescued me from my very critical position. Nothing
is more painful than to be compelled to use decisive and severe measures
in such a conjuncture, at the risk of ones acts being disapproved and
disavowed.

Meanwhile, in the coffee-house, a somewhat indecorous fight went on,
the mirrors and windows were smashed, and the scuffle ended by the
officers forcing each other out into the street. All these affronts
naturally would have to be washed out in blood. In a quarter of an hour
our battalions were drawn up in the market-place: the general commanding
at Amiens, and who just then happened to be absent, had given the
strictest orders, that, in case of such disturbances, we were not to use
our arms till the very last extremity. We were compelled, therefore,
patiently to allow the French to march through our ranks, on foot and
with drawn sabres, challenging us to the fight, as they passed, not with
words, certainly, but by their threatening looks. Amongst them I saw, to
my great astonishment, the young civilian whom I had that morning put in
confinement, and who now passed several times before me, in hussar
uniform, and invited me to follow him. In the confusion of the first
alarm, he had escaped from the guard-room, put on regimentals, and now
exhaled his vindictiveness in muttered invectives against me and the
detested Prussians. Of course I could not leave my company; and, had I
been able, it would have been very foolish to have done so.

In a short half-hour the French and Prussian authorities were
assembled. The hussars received orders to march away instantly, and we
were to change our quarters the next day. Before we did so, however,
rendezvous was taken and kept by several hussar officers, on the one
hand, and by Lieutenant Sebottendorf, his second, Merkatz, and six
others of our regiment, on the other, to fight the matter out.
Sebottendorf and his opponent, who had commenced the dispute, also began
the fight. They walked up to the barriers, fixed at ten paces; the
Frenchmans shot knocked the cap off the head of our comrade, who
returned the fire with such cool and steady aim, that his opponent fell
dead upon the spot. Another hussar instantly sprang forward to take his
turn with Merkatz. I looked about for my young antagonist; but no one
had seen him since the previous day, nor did the French officers know
whom I meant; so it is possible that, favoured by the confusion of the
previous day, he had donned a uniform to which he had no right. There
was no more fighting, however. After long discussions and mutual
explanations, matters were peaceably arranged. The officer who had
caused the strife, alone bore the penalty. He was carried away by his
comrades, and we repaired to our new cantonments. The brave Von
Sebottendorf had vindicated with fitting energy and decision the fame
and honour of the Prussian officer.

The month of February, 1815, witnessed the return to Germany of Von
Rahdens battalion. A soldiers home is wherever the quarters are best;
and it was with many regrets that the Baron and his comrades left the
pleasant cantonments and agreeable hospitality of gay and lively France,
for the dull fortress of Magdeburg. The Baron shudders at the bare
recollection of the unwelcome change, and of the subsequent reduction
of his regiment to the peace establishment. Nor, according to his
account, did any very hearty welcome from their civilian countrymen
console the homeward-bound warriors for stoppage of field-allowance and
diminished chance of promotion. They were received coldly, if not with
aversion. Instead of good quarters and wholesome food, bad lodgings and
worse rations fell to their share. Stale provisions, the leavings, in
some instances, of the foes from whom they had delivered Germany, were
deemed good enough for the conquerors of Kulm and Leipzig. Fatigue
duties replaced opportunities of distinction, economy and ennui were the
order of the day, and, amongst the disappointed subalterns, for whom the
war had finished far too soon, but one note was heard, a sound of
discontent and lamentation. It was the first opportunity these young
soldiers had of learning that the man-at-arms, prized and cherished when
his services are needed, is too often looked upon in peace time as a
troublesome encumbrance and useless expense.

Suddenly, however, and most unexpectedly, came the signal for renewed
activity. On the 29th of March, intelligence reached Magdeburg that
Napoleon had escaped from Elba, and, after a triumphant march of twenty
days, had resumed his seat upon the imperial throne. Joyful news for the
ambitious subaltern, eager for action and advancement; less pleasant
tidings to the old officer, who believed his campaigns at an end, and
hoped tranquilly to enjoy his well-earned promotion. Cockade and sabre
instantly rose in public estimation; and those who, a day previously,
had cast sour glances at the neglected soldier, now lauded his valour
and encouraged his aspirations. Forgetting the toils and perils of
recent campaigns, old Bluchers legions joyfully prepared for another
bout with the Frenchman. Once more the march was ordered Rhine-wards;
and, on the 18th April, Von Rahden and his battalion crossed that river
at Ehrenbreitstein.

An accident, the overturn of a carriage, by which he was severely hurt,
separated the Baron, for some time, from his regiment. He rejoined it at
Liege; to the great surprise of all for his death had been reported, and
his name struck off the strength. The officers gave him a dinner,--the
men welcomed his appearance on parade with a triple hurra. Happy in
these proofs of his fellow-soldiers esteem he looked forward joyfully
and confidently to the approaching struggle. It soon came. In the night
of the 15th June the alarm sounded: Blows corps hastily got under
arms, and marched to the assistance of Prince Blucher. Front three in
the morning till one in the afternoon they advanced without pause or
slackening; then a short halt was ordered. The sound of Bluchers cannon
was plainly heard. He was hard pressed by the French: but a burning sun
and a ten hours march had exhausted the strength of Blows troops; rest
and refreshment were indispensable. It was not till eleven at night that
they reached Gembloux, and there met the old field-marshals disordered
battalions in full retreat from the disastrous field of Ligny.

Of the battle of Waterloo, the Baron of course saw but the close.
Nevertheless he had a little hard fighting and received a wound at the
taking of Planchenoit, which was full of French troops, principally
grenadiers of the guard. The order was given. The second regiment will
take the village by storm. My brave colonel was the first man in the
place; but he was also the first killed: a shot from a window knocked
him over. Notwithstanding this loss, in an instant we were masters of
the village. At its farther extremity was the churchyard, surrounded by
a low wall, and occupied by two battalions of the old Imperial Guard.
Hats off! He who has fought against them will know how to admire them.
Like a swarm of bees, my regiment, whose ranks had got disordered during
the short fight in the village, dashed forward with lowered bayonets
against the cemetery. We were within fifteen paces of it. Shoulder
arms! cried the French commander. More than once had the guardsmen
found the sign of contempt profit them, by confusing their antagonists,
and startling them into a hasty and irregular discharge. This time it
did not answer; in five minutes the churchyard was ours. Scarcely had
we won, when we again lost it. Thrice did it change hands, and the
ground was heaped with dead. The third encounter was terrible--with the
bayonet, just below the lime trees that shaded the cemetery gate. We
officers took the muskets of the fallen, and fought like common
soldiers. Some of the French officers followed our example; others,
standing in the foremost rank, did fearful execution with point of
sword. Here fell my dearest friend, thrust through the heart; I sprang
forward to revenge his death, when a bronzed hero of the Pyramids shot
me down. The wound was not very severe; and, although the ball could
not be extracted, the Baron, after a months stay at Brussels, was able
to rejoin his battalion, then quartered in Normandy. Thence, early in
August, he marched to Paris, to take share in the grand ceremony of
blessing the colours of the Prussian regiments.

On a splendid summers day, (2d September, 1815,) 25,000 to 30,000
Prussians, comprising the whole of the guards, six infantry and six
cavalry regiments of the line, were formed up in the Champ de Mars in
one great square. In its centre was an altar, composed, military
fashion, of drums, and covered with red velvet, upon which lay the Iron
Cross. The Emperors Alexander and Francis, our noble king, and all the
generals of the Allies, stood around and listened bareheaded to the
impressive thanksgiving offered up by Chaplain Offelsmeyer. Here the
colours of the various regiments, surmounted by the Iron Cross, and
having the Alliance ribband--white, black, and orange--and the ribband
of the medal cast out of captured artillery for Prussias brave
warriors fluttering from their staves, received, in the hands of our
king and his imperial friends, a high and rare consecration. As the
blessing was spoken over the lowered colours, a numerous park of
artillery fired a royal salute, and then, in review order, the troops
defiled before the King of Prussia. When the infantry of the line had
passed, the officers were allowed to fall out and look on, whilst the
guards and grenadiers marched by. It was a splendid sight, especially at
the moment when the two emperors, at the head of their Prussian
grenadier regiments, lowered swords, and paid military honours to our
King. The honours of the day were for Frederick William the Third; and
the sovereigns of Russia and Austria, Baron von Rahden tells us, reined
back their horses and kept a little in rear, that they might not seem to
appropriate a share of them. Only one soldierly figure, astride, proud
and stately, upon a splendid charger, had taken post on the same line
with the King of Prussia, some twenty paces to his right. Alone, and
seemingly unsympathizing, he beheld, with thorough British phlegm, the
military pageant. It was the Duke of Wellington, the bold hero of
Eastern fight, the prudent general in the Peninsula, the fortunate
victor of Waterloo. Accident and the crowd brought me close to his
horses breast; and, with the assurance of a young man who feels himself
an old and experienced soldier, I contemplated his really lofty, and
proud, and noble appearance. I should find it very difficult to describe
the Duke as he then was. Not that one line has been effaced of the
impression stamped upon my memory whilst I stood for more than half an
hour scarce three paces from his stirrup. But tame and feeble would be
any portrait my pen could draw of the flashing eagle eye, the hawks
nose, the slightly sarcastic expression of the pointed chin, and
compressed, seemingly lipless, mouth. His hair was scanty and dark;
neither moustache nor whisker filled and rounded his thin oval
physiognomy. His high forehead, that noblest feature of the masculine
countenance, I could not see, for a long narrow military hat, with a
rather shabby plume, was pressed low down upon his brows. For two
reasons, however, the impression the English leader that day made upon
me, was not the most favourable: I was vexed at his placing himself thus
intentionally apart from, and on the same line with my king; and then it
seemed to me unnatural that his deportment should be so stiff, his bust
so marble-like, and that at such a moment his features should not once
become animated, or his eye gleam approval.

This was not the last sight obtained by the Prussian lieutenant of the
British field-marshal. In 1835 Baron von Rahden came to London. During
the siege of Antwerp he had served as a volunteer under General Chass,
and had drawn a large military _tableau_ or plan of the defence of the
citadel. This he had dedicated to the King of Holland, and now wished to
confide to an English engraver. To facilitate his views, Chass gave him
an introduction to the Duke. We will translate his account of the
interview it procured him. He went to Apsley House in Dutch uniform, his
Iron Cross and medal, and the Prussian order of St. Anne, upon his
breast, the latter having been bestowed upon him for his conduct at
Waterloo, or La Belle Alliance, as the Prussians style it. He was
introduced by an old domestic, who, as far as he could judge, might have
been a mute, into a spacious apartment.

I had waited almost an hour, and became impatient. I was on the point
of seeking a servant, and causing myself to be announced a second time,
when a small tapestried door, in the darker part of the saloon, opened,
and a thin little man, with a stoop in his shoulders, dressed in a dark
blue frock, ditto trousers, white stockings, and low shoes with buckles,
approached without looking at me. I took him for servant, a steward, or
some such person, and inquired rather quickly whether I could not have
the honour to be announced to the Duke. The next instant I perceived my
blunder; the little stooping man suddenly grew a head taller, and his
eagle eye fixed itself upon me. I at once recognised my neighbour on the
Champ de Mars. Rather enjoying my confusion, as I thought, the Duke
again turned to the door, and, without a word, signed to me to follow
him. When I entered the adjoining room he had already taken a chair,
with his back to the light, and he motioned me to a seat opposite to
him, just in the full glare from the plate-glass windows. We conversed
in French; I badly, the Duke after a very middling fashion. With
tolerable clearness I managed to explain what had brought me to London,
and to crave the Dukes gracious protection. In reply the Duke said that
He greatly esteemed General Chass, who had fought bravely at Waterloo
under his orders: that he was pleased with his defence of Antwerp, &c.
At last he asked me by whom my plan, which lay upon the table beside
him, and which he neither praised nor found fault with, was to be
engraved.

_Chez M. James Wyld, gographe du roi_, was my somewhat over-hasty
answer.

_Gographe de sa Majest Britannique_, said the Duke, by way of
correction.

A few more sentences were exchanged, doubtless of very crooked
construction, as far as I was concerned,--for I was a good deal
embarrassed; and then I received my dismissal.

The _Gographe de sa Majest Britannique_ told me, some weeks
afterwards, that the Duke had been to him, had bought several military
maps and plans, and, as if casually, had spoken of mine, which hung in
the shop, had said that he knew me, &c.

Notwithstanding the Dukes kind notice and patronage, Captain von Rahden
takes occasion to attack his grace for an expression used by him in the
House of Lords in 1836, during a debate on a motion for the abolition of
corporal punishment in the army. The Duke maintained that such
punishment was necessary for the preservation of discipline; and on the
Prussian army being cited as a proof of the contrary, he referred, in no
very flattering terms, to the state of discipline of Bluchers troops in
1815. There was some talk about the matter at the time, and an indignant
answer to the Dukes assertion, written by the German general, Von
Grolman, was translated in the English journals. Baron von Rahden
himself, as he tells us, took advantage of being in London on the
anniversary of Waterloo, 1836, to perpetrate a little paragraph
scribbling, in certain evening papers, with respect to the battle, and
to the share borne in it by old MARSCHALL VORWAERTS and his men. That
the campaigns of 1813-15 were most creditable to Prussian courage and
patriotism, none will dispute; that the discipline of the Prussian army
was then by no means first-rate, is equally positive. Nay, its
mediocrity is easy to infer from passages in Baron von Rahdens own
book. Without affirming it to have been at the lowest ebb, it was
certainly not such as could find approval with one who, for five years,
had ranged the Peninsula at the head of the finest troops in Europe. As
to who won the battle of Waterloo, the discussion of that question is
long since at an end. The Baron claims a handsome share of the glory for
his countrymen, and insists, that if they were rather late for the
fight, they at least made themselves very useful in pursuit of the
beaten foe. If their discipline, had been so very bad, he says, they
could hardly, on the second day after a defeat, have come up to the
_rescue_ of their allied brethren. The arrival of the Prussians was
certainly opportune; but, had they not come up, there cannot be a doubt
that Wellington, if he had done no more, would have held his own, and
maintained the field all night: for he commanded men who, according to
his great opponents own admission, knew not when they were beaten.

Old General Blucher was a sworn foe of all unnecessary wordiness and
commendation. What do you extol? he once said, to put an end to the
eulogiums lavished on him for a gloriously won victory. It is my
boldness, Gneisenaus judgment, and the mercy of the Great God. Let us
add, and the stubborn courage and perseverance of a faithful people and
a brave army. Without these thoroughly national qualities of our troops,
such great results would never have followed the closing act of the
mighty struggle of 1813, 1814, and 1815. General Gneisenaus
unparalleled pursuit of the French after the battle of La Belle
Alliance, could never have taken place, had not our troops displayed
vigour and powers of endurance wonderful to reflect upon. The instant
and rapid chase commanded by Gneisenau was only to cease when the last
breath and strength of man and horse were exhausted. Thus was it that,
by daybreak on the 19th June, he and his Prussians found themselves at
Frasne, nearly six leagues from the field of battle, which they had left
at half-past ten at night. Only a few squadrons had kept up with him;
all the infantry remained behind; but the French army that had fought so
gallantly at Waterloo and La Belle Alliance, was totally destroyed.

The battle won, a courier was instantly despatched to the King of
Prussia. The person chosen to convey the glorious intelligence was
Colonel von Thile, now a general, commanding the Rhine district. From
that officers narrative of his journey, the Baron gives some
interesting extracts.

In the course of fight, Von Thile _loquitur_, I had lost sight of my
servant, and of my second horse, a capital gray. The brown charger I
rode was wounded and tired, and it was at a slow pace that I started, to
endeavour to reach Brussels that night. A Wurtemberg courier had also
been sent off, the only one, besides myself, who carried the good news
to Germany. Whilst my weary steed threatened each moment to sink under
my weight, the Wurtemberger galloped by, and with him went my hopes of
being the first to announce the victory to the king. Suddenly I
perceived my gray trotting briskly towards me. I wasted little time in
scolding my servant; I thought only of overtaking the Wurtemberger.

At Brussels I learned from the postmaster that my fortunate rival had
left ten minutes before me, in a light carriage with a pair of swift
horses. I followed: close upon his heels every where, but unable to
catch him up. At last, on the evening of the third day, I came in sight
of him; his axle-tree was broken; his carriage lay useless on the road.
I might have dashed past in triumph; but I refrained, and offered to
take him with me, on condition that I should be the first to proclaim
the victory. He joyfully accepted the proposal; and I was rewarded for
my good nature, for he was of great service to me.

Von Thile expected to find the king at Frankfort-on-the-Main; but he had
not yet arrived, and the colonel continued his hurried journey, by
Heidelberg and Fulda, to Naumberg.

Five days and nights unceasing fatigue and exertion had exhausted my
strength, but nevertheless I pushed forward, and on the following
morning reached Naumberg on the Saal. In the suburb, on this side the
river, I fell in with Prussian troops, returning, covered with dust and
in very indifferent humour, from a review passed by the king. At last
then I was at my journeys end. They asked me what news I brought: all
expected some fresh misfortune, for only an hour previously intelligence
of the defeat at Ligny had arrived, and upon parade the king had been
ungracious and out of temper. I took good care not to breathe a word of
my precious secret, and hurried on. In the further suburb I met the
kings carriage. We stopped; I jumped out.

Your majesty! a great, a glorious victory! Napoleon annihilated; a
hundred and fifty guns captured! And I handed him a paper containing a
few lines in Prince Bluchers handwriting. The king devoured them with
his eyes, and cast a grateful tearful glance to Heaven.

TWO HUNDRED CANNON, according to this, was his first exclamation, in
tones of heartfelt delight and satisfaction.

I followed his majesty into the town. The newly instituted assembly of
Saxon States was convoked, and the king made a speech announcing the
victory. And truly I never heard such speaking before or since. I was
ordered to go on to Berlin with my good news. This was in fact
unnecessary, for a courier had already been despatched, but the king
knew that my family, from which I had been two years separated, was at
Berlin, and he wished to procure me the pleasure of seeing it. For that
noble and excellent monarch was also the kindest and best of men.

Soon after Waterloo, Baron von Rahden appears to have left the service;
for he informs us, that between 1816 and 1830 he made long residences in
Russia, Holland, and England. Perhaps he found garrison life an
unendurable change from the stir and activity of campaigns, and
travelled to seek excitement. Be that as it may, fifteen years repose
did not extinguish his martial ardour. The echoes awakened by the tramp
of a French army marching upon Antwerp, were, to the veteran of Leipzig,
like trumpet-sound to trained charger, and he hurried to exchange
another shot with his old enemies. Having once more brought hand and
hilt acquainted, he grieved to sever them, and when the brief struggle
in Belgium terminated, he looked about for a fresh field of action.
Spain was the only place where bullets were just then flying, and
thither the Baron betook himself, to defend the cause of legitimacy
under Cabreras blood-stained banner. Concerning his travels, and his
later campaigns, he promises his readers a second and a third volume;
and the favourable reception the first has met with in Germany, will
doubtless encourage him to redeem his pledge.




LAPPENBERGS ANGLO-SAXONS.

THE HEPTARCHY.


We are willing to acknowledge, without blindly exaggerating, our
obligations to the men of learning of Germany, in several branches of
art and science. We owe them something in criticism, something in
philosophy, and a great deal in philology. But in no department have
they deserved better of the commonwealth of letters, than in the
important province of antiquarian history, where their erudition, their
research, their patience, their impartiality, are invaluable. Whatever
subject they select is made their own, and is so thoroughly studied in
all its circumstantial details and collateral bearings, that new and
original views of the truth are sure to be unfolded, as the fixed gaze
of an unwearied eye will at last elicit light and order out of apparent
darkness and confusion.

The writer, whose chief work is now before us, cannot and would not, we
know, prefer a claim to the foremost place among those who have thus
distinguished themselves. That honour is conceded by all to the name of
Niebuhr, a master mind who stands unrivalled in his own domain, and
whose discoveries, promulgated with no advantage of style or manner, and
in opposition to prejudices long and deeply cherished, have wrought a
revolution in the study of ancient history to which there is scarcely a
parallel. But among those who are next in rank, Dr. Lappenberg is
entitled to a high position. His present work is one of the very best of
a series of European histories of great merit and utility. He has given
fresh interest to a theme that seemed worn out and exhausted. He has
brought forward new facts, and evolved new conclusions that had eluded
the observation and sagacity of able and industrious predecessors. He
has treated the history of a country, not his own, with as much care and
correctness, and with as true a feeling of national character and
destinies as if he had been a native; while he has brought to his task a
calmness of judgment, and freedom from prejudice, as well as a range of
illustration from extraneous sources, which a native could scarcely be
expected to command. It must now, we think, be granted, that the best
history of Saxon England--the most complete, the most judicious, the
most unbiassed, and the most profound, is the work of a foreigner. It
must, at the same time, be said that Lappenbergs history could not have
exhibited this high degree of excellence, without the ample assistance
afforded by the labours of our countrymen who had gone before him, and
of which their successor has freely taken the use and frankly
acknowledged the value.

The history and character of our Anglo-Saxon ancestors, have employed
the pen of the most illustrious among our native writers. One of our
greatest poets, and one of our greatest masters of prose,--Milton and
Burke--have felt the attraction and importance of the subject, at the
same time that they have given evidence to its obscurity and difficulty.
In later times men of less genius, but of more acquaintance with the
times and topics involved in the inquiry, have added greatly to our
knowledge of those important events and institutions in which the germs
of our present government and national disposition are to be found. But
Saxon England can only be thoroughly understood by means of aids and
appliances, which have been seldom possessed in any eminent degree by
the general run of our antiquarian writers. A thorough familiarity with
the Anglo-Saxon language and literature is obviously the first
requisite: yet this attainment was scarcely to be met with till within a
few years back, and even now, we fear that it is confined to a narrow
circle, and that the able men who have made progress in this arduous
path, lament that they have so slender and so scattered a train of
followers. If we can suppose inquirers studying Roman history, without
being able to conjugate a Latin verb, or to gather more than a dim
suspicion of a Latin authors meaning, we shall have a case nearly
analogous to the condition and achievements of our Saxon scholars in the
last, and even in part of the present century. Another qualification for
the successful cultivation of this field of study, is an intimate
acquaintance with the analogous customs and traditions of kindred
countries, an accomplishment which few Englishmen could till lately
pretend to possess, but without which, a great deal of what occurs in
our own early history must seem senseless and unintelligible. The key to
many apparent mysteries in English antiquities, is often to be found in
something which has been more clearly developed elsewhere, and which may
even yet survive in a Danish song or saga, or a German proverb or
superstition.

In these respects, our kinsmen across the water have undoubtedly the
advantage of us; and to most of them the subject of English history
cannot be alien in interest or barren of attraction. It is impossible
for an enlightened native or neighbour of continental Saxony, to tread
the southern shore of the North Sea, and think of the handful of his
countrymen who, fourteen centuries ago, embarked for Britain from that
very strand, without feeling the great results involved in that simple
incident, and owning the sacred sympathies which unite him with men of
English blood. He may well remember with wonder that the few exiles or
emigrants who thus went forth on an obscure and uncertain enterprise
carried in their bark the destinies of a mighty moral empire, which was
one day to fill the world with the glory of the Saxon name, and to
revive the valour and virtue of Greece and Rome, with a new admixture of
Teutonic honour and Christian purity. He may well kindle with pride to
admire the eminence to which that adventurous colony has attained from
such small beginnings, and to consider how much the old Germanic virtues
of truth and honesty, and home-bred kindliness, have conduced to that
marvellous result; while perhaps the less pleasing thought may at times
overshadow his mind, that his country, great as she is, has in some
things been outstripped by her descendant, and that the best
excellencies and institutions of ancient Germany may have been less
faithfully preserved and less nobly matured in their native soil than in
the favoured island to which some shoots of them were then transplanted.

If some such feelings prompted or encouraged the writer of these volumes
to engage in his work, Dr. Lappenberg had other facilities to aid him in
the task. He had been sent to Scotland in early life, and had studied at
our metropolitan university where he is still kindly remembered by some
who will be among the first to peruse those pages. His residence in this
ancient city of the Angles, and his visits to the most interesting
portions of the island, must have formed a familiarity and sympathy with
our language, manners, and institutions which would afford additional
inducements and qualifications to undertake a history of England. He has
distinguished himself by other valuable compositions of a historical and
antiquarian character, and particularly by some connected with the
medival jurisprudence and history of his native city of Hamburgh. But
his reputation will probably be most widely diffused, and most
permanently preserved, by the admirable work which is the subject of our
present remarks.

The labours of Mr. Thorpe, so well known as one of the very few
accomplished Saxonists of whom we can boast, has now, after much
discouragement, placed the Anglo-Saxon portion of Lappenbergs history
within the reach of English readers, and has given it a new value by his
own additions and illustrations. The translation ought to be found in
the library of every one among us who professes to study the history or
to patronize the literature of his country.

The invasion or occupation of England by German tribes is involved in an
obscurity, which does not disappear before a rigorous examination of its
traditional details. On the contrary, the more we consider it the less
certainly we can pronounce as to the truth. That on the departure of the
Romans in the fifth century, a full and continuous stream of German
population found its way into Britain, and that ere long the invading
race gained the ascendant, and planted firmly in the soil their laws,
their language, and their institutions, are facts established by a cloud
of witnesses, and by that real evidence which lawyers consider superior
to testimony. But how, or at what exact date this process commenced,
under whose leadership or auspices it was carried on, and with what
rapidity, or through what precise channels the tide flowed, are matters
of more difficulty, on which, from the want of authentic materials, it
is idle to dogmatise, however unpleasant it may be to remain in doubt.
There is no want of ancient narratives of these supposed events; but
though ancient as to us, they are neither so near the time to which they
refer, nor so clear and consistent with probability, and with each
other, as to command implicit deference.

Dr. Lappenberg, leaning perhaps too readily to the German theory of
mythes, sees little in the history and achievements of Hengist and Horsa
which can be considered authentic. Mr. Thorpe, on the other hand, is
less sceptical, and while directing our notice to the fact that the
northern tribes occasionally submitted to the command of double leaders,
he has adduced in evidence the ancient poetical celebrity of Hengist as
a Jutish hero. The episode from Beowulf, which he has inserted and ably
translated in a note, is interesting and important in this view. But,
after all, we confess that our mind remains in a state of suspense. We
think the proof sufficient neither to justify a belief in the existence
of the two chiefs, nor to authorise us in consigning them to non-entity;
and we hold it an important duty in historical criticism to proportion
our conclusions precisely to the premises from which they are deduced.
Where there is good evidence, we should believe; where the evidence is
incoherent or impossible, we should disbelieve. But there are conditions
of a historical question where we can legitimately arrive at no opinion
either way, and where we must be content to leave the fact in
uncertainty, by a verdict of _not proven_.

There is no historian, we think, who mentions Hengist or Horsa, until at
an interval of two or three hundred years after their supposed era; and
what sort of interval had thus elapsed? A period of pagan obscurity,
passed by the invaders in incessant conflicts, for a home and
habitation, or for existence itself,--a period of which not a relic even
of poetical tradition has survived, and in which the means of recording
events, or of calculating time, were wholly different from our modern
apparatus, and are too little known to let us judge of their
sufficiency. The celebrity of Hengist in the old Saxon epics, but in
which he is never, we think, connected with the invasion of England,
appears to be a double-edged weapon, and may even account for his name
being taken as a convenient stock to bear a graft of later romance. If
we add to all this the tendency of the age to fiction and exaggeration,
the marks of a fabulous character, so forcibly pointed out by Lappenberg
in the recurrence of certain fixed numbers or periods of years, chiefly
on an octonary system, as distinguished by conspicuous events, the
divine genealogies attributed to the heroes, and the resemblance in
incident to similar traditions in other ages or scenes, we shall easily
see the unsteady footing on which the question stands, and be obliged to
own, that, if our belief must be renounced in Romulus and Remus, we can
scarcely go to the stake for Hengist and Horsa. It is remarkable, that
while the Roman brothers are said to bear one and the same name in
different forms, the appellations of the Anglo-Saxon leaders are also so
far identical, as each signifying the warlike animal which is said to
have been emblazoned on the Saxon banner.

It should be satisfactory to our West-British brethren, that Lappenberg
sees no reason to distrust the existence of the illustrious Arthur, but
he admits too readily the questionable discovery of his grave.

    The contemporary who records the victory at Bath gained by his
    countrymen in the first year of his life, and who bears witness
    of its consequences after a lapse of forty-four years, Gildas,
    surnamed the Wise, considers it superfluous to mention the name
    of the far-famed victor; but his wide-spread work, and the yet
    more wide-spread extracts from it in Beda, have reached no
    region in which the fame of King Arthur had not outstript them,
    the noble champion who defended the liberty, usages, and
    language of the ancient country from destruction by savage
    enemies; who protected the cross against the Pagans, and gained
    security to the churches most distinguished for their antiquity
    and various knowledge, to which a considerable portion of Europe
    owes both its Christianity and some of its most celebrated
    monasteries. Called to such high-famed deeds, he needed not the
    historian to live through all ages more brilliantly than the
    heroes of the chronicles, among whom he is counted from the time
    of Jeffrey of Monmouth; but, not to mention the works which,
    about the year 720, Eremita Britannus is said to have composed
    on the Holy Graal, and on the deeds of King Arthur, the rapid
    spread of Jeffreys work over the greater part of Europe, proves
    that the belief in the hero of it was deeply rooted. In the
    twelfth century a Greek poem, recently restored to light, was
    composed in celebration of Arthur and the heroes of the round
    table. Still more manifestly, however, do the numerous local
    memorials, which throughout the whole of the then Christian part
    of Europe, from the Scottish hills to Mount Etna, bear allusion
    to the name of Arthur; while on the other hand, the more
    measured veneration of the Welsh poets for that prince, who
    esteem his general, Geraint, more highly than the king himself,
    and even relate that the latter, far from being always
    victorious, surrendered Hampshire and Somersetshire to the
    Saxons, may be adduced as no worthless testimony for the
    historic existence of King Arthur. Even those traditions
    concerning him, which at the first glance seem composed in
    determined defiance of all historic truth,--those which recount
    the expedition against the Romans on their demand of subjection
    from him,--appear not totally void of foundation, when we call
    to mind that a similar expedition actually took place in Gaul;
    and are, moreover, informed, on the most unquestionable
    authority, of another undertaking in the year 468, on the demand
    of Anthemius, by the British general Riothamus, who led twelve
    thousand Britons across the ocean against the Visigoths in Gaul,
    and of his battles on the Loire. This very valuable narrative
    gives us some insight into the connexions and resources of those
    parts of Britain which had not yet been afflicted with the Saxon
    pirates.

    Arthur fell in a conflict on the river Camel, in Cornwall,
    against his nephew, Medrawd; his death was, however, long kept
    secret, and his countrymen waited many years for his return, and
    his protection against the Saxons. The discovery of his
    long-concealed grave in the abbey of Glastonbury, is mentioned
    by credible contemporaries, and excited at the time no suspicion
    of any religious or political deception. Had the king of
    England, Henry the Second, who caused the exhumation of the
    coffin in the year 1189, wished merely, through an artifice, to
    convince the Welsh of the death of their national hero, he would
    hardly himself have acted so conspicuous a part on the occasion.
    Poem and tradition bear witness to the spirit and his ashes, and
    the gravestone to the life and name of Arthur. Faith in the
    existence of this Christian Celtic Hector cannot be shaken by
    short-sighted doubt, though much must yet be done for British
    story, to render the sense latent in the poems of inspired
    bards, which have in many cases reached us only in spiritless
    paraphrases, into the sober language of historic criticism.

It appears not unlikely, that the period fixed by the traditions for the
arrival of the Saxons does not truly indicate the first settlement of
their countrymen on our shores. In East Anglia, (Norfolk and Suffolk) as
well as in Northumbria, and perhaps indefinitely to the north-east,
successive colonies of German immigrants had probably found a home on
islands at the mouths of rivers, or on barren tracts of sea-beach, along
a thinly peopled and ill cultivated country. The cautious and tentative
occupation of the shore thus taken, may have ultimately suggested the
invitation of the Saxons, or facilitated their invasion of Britain in
the deserted and distracted state in which the Romanised inhabitants
were left, when their masters and protectors withdrew.

The introduction of Christianity among the English Saxons, is the first
great event in their annals, that stands brightly out in the light of
history. To whom we are indebted for this mighty and merciful
revolution, does not, we think, admit of controversy. Though no friends
to the corruptions or ambition of Rome, we cannot withhold from the
Roman see the honour that here belongs to it, and for the service thus
rendered to England, to Europe, and to mankind, the name of Gregory the
Great deserves a place in a nobler calendar than that in which the
saints of his own church are enrolled. The liberal spirit in which the
mission was in some respects organized, deserves high praise. It is my
wish, writes Gregory, that you sedulously select what you may think
most acceptable to Almighty God, be it in the Roman, or in the Gallican,
or in any other church, and introduce into the church of the Angles that
which you shall have so collected; for things are not to be loved for
the sake of places, but places for the sake of good things. The
intervention of the Pope was the more meritorious and seasonable from
the conduct of the British clergy, in leaving their Saxon conquerors
without an attempt to convert them. Such a course may have been natural
and excusable, but it was not prompted either by Christian love or by
enlightened policy; and we cannot altogether refrain from reading in the
subsequent massacre of the monks of Bangor by the Pagan sword of
Ethelfrid, the retribution which Augustine had denounced as awaiting the
Celtic Church, for not preaching to the Angles the way of life.

The Irish clergy, useful as they afterwards were, had not then advanced
so far in their progress, as to reach the Anglican border. It was in the
year 563 that St. Columba passed over from Ireland to the Northern
Picts, in whose conversion he was occupied about thirty years. And it
was in 597 that Ethelbert of Kent was baptized, and was followed soon
after to the font by ten thousand of his subjects. Whether there was any
connexion between these simultaneous movements, beyond the ripening of
events for so desirable a result, has not, so far, as we know, been
traced by any inquirer.

The rapidity with which Christianity was then accepted implies a
remarkable condition of the public mind. The bigotry, and even the
confiding belief of the old religion, must in a great measure have
passed away, and a certain dissatisfaction have come to be felt with its
creed and its consolations. This is peculiarly visible in the course
which the conversion took in Northumbria, where, if we can trust the
traditionary accounts, a spirit of philosophical inquiry had pervaded
the nobility, and even the priesthood, implying a high degree of
intellectual advancement, and an earnest sense of the religious
necessities of our nature. Let us take the well-known incidents of this
event as they are given in the poetry of Wordsworth, rather than in any
prose narrative.


PAULINUS.

    But to remote Northumbrias royal hall,
    Where thoughtful Edwin, tutord in the school
    Of sorrow, still maintains a Heathen rule,
    Who comes with functions apostolical?
    Mark him, of shoulders curved, and stature tall,
    Black hair, and vivid eye, and meagre cheek,
    His prominent feature like an eagles beak;
    A man whose aspect doth at once appal
    And strike with reverence. The monarch leans
    Towrd the pure truths this delegate propounds;
    Repeatedly his own deep mind he sounds
    With careful hesitation,--then convenes
    A synod of his counsellors:--give ear,
    And what a pensive sage doth utter, hear!


PERSUASION.

    Mans life is like a sparrow, mighty king!
    That, stealing in while by 