 тена сложена од разних минерала.

~тресетиште~, место где се створио тресет.

~тријумф~, победа.


~угљена киселина~, онај тешки и загушљиви гас, који се из плућа 
издише, који ветри из киселих вода и из кречана када се пече 
креч.

~укопина~, оно што се уз мртваца у гроб меће.

~урочица~, пуж што се носи уза се од урока.

~урутка~, мала, проста алатка.

~устубочен~, усправљен.


~фазе~, узастопне промене које се дешавају па извесним 
предметима, на  пример на Месецу.

~фауна~, збир свију животиња у некоме пределу и у неком извесном 
времену.  Српске земље имају сада извесну фауну сисара тица, 
риба, пужева итд., која се  зове данашња фауна српских земаља. 
Пре ове, у свакој геолошкој периоди била је и засебна фауна, која 
се од раније и позније фауне разликовала неким особеним  
животињама, које су само у тој периоди живеле. Ове фауне из 
прошлих времена зову  се _фосилне_ (упор.: фосил).

~фашина~, сноп дугачкога прућа.

~флора~, збир биљака у некоме пределу и у неком извесноме 
времену. У разним  геолошким периодама биле су и различне флоре 
(упор.: фауна).

~фосил~ је латинско fossilis, а значи нешто ископано; фосилни је, 
на  пример, угаљ који се из земље копа, за разлику од жива угља, 
који се прави од  дрвећа. Фосилна је со која се из мајдана вади. 
Ово се име најобичније даје  остацима од биљака и животиња који 
датирају из прошлих геолошких периода а у  земним су слојевима 
буди на који начин сачувани. Када су скамењени онда се зову  
петрефакти. За људске кости каже се да су фосилне само кад су од 
људи из прошле  геолошке периоде. Обично су као фосили очуване од 
кичмењака његове кости а од мекушаца њихове љштуре. Али се у 
неким изванредним приликама очувало и месо од изумрлих сисара; у 
сибирској залеђеној земљи нахођене су лешине са месом од  мамута 
и носорога. Фосилни су остаци врло важни за познавање земље, јер 
се по  њима може да позна релативна старост појединих слојева у 
којима се нађу. У  српским земљама најмлађи су фосили у високим и 
дубоким речним наносима па фосили  заостали из језера која су 
негда испуњавала Посавину и Подунавље и оделите  котлине у јужној 
области наше земље. Од ових су старији морски пужеви и шкољке,  
којих има доста по таким слојевима у северноме појасу српских 
земаља. А пре ових  још живеле су разне животиње чији се фосили 
находе у чвршћим стенама и  брдовитијим крајевима нашим.


~Хидрографија~ је онај део Географије (Земљописа) у коме се 
описују реке  итд.

~хлоромеланит~, варијетет јадеита.

~Хронологија~ утврђује ред узастопних времена и историских 
датума.


~цивилизација~, стање уљуђености створено под утицајем наука, 
вештина,  заната, религија итд.


~шип~, колац.

~шуљак~, престругани део дебла.


~џилит~, тешка палица која се из руке на противника баца.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 11291 ***
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10901 ***

THREE YOUNG KNIGHTS

By Annie Hamilton Donnell




CHAPTER I.

The last wisp of hay was in the Eddy mows.  "Come on!" shouted Jot.
"Here she goes--hip, hip, hoo-ray!"

"Hoor-a-ay!" echoed Kent.  But of course Old Tilly took it calmly.  He
planted his brown hands pocket-deep and his bare, brown legs wide apart,
and surveyed the splendid, bursting mows with honest pride.

"Yes, sir, that's the finest lot o' hay in Hexham county; beat it if you
can, sir!" he said approvingly.  Then, being ready, he caught off his
own hat and cheered, too.

"Hold on, you chaps; give the old man a chance to holler with you!"
Father Eddy's big, hearty voice cried above the din, and there was the
flaring, sun-browned "wide-awake" swinging with the other hats.

"Hooray for the best hay in town!  Hooray for the smartest team o' boys!
Hooray for lib-er-tee!"

"Hooray!  Hooray!"

They were all of them out of breath and red in the face, but how they
cheered!  Liberty--that was something to cheer for! After planting-time
and haying, hurrah for liberty!

The din softened gradually.  With a sweep of his arm, father gathered
all the boys in a laughing heap before him.

"Well," he said, "what next?  Who's going to celebrate? I'm done with
you for a fortnight.  I'm going to hire Esau Whalley to milk and do the
chores, and send you small chaps about your business.  You've earned
your holiday.  And I don't know but it's as good a time as any to settle
up. Pay day's as good one day as another."

He drew out a little tight roll of bills and sorted out three
five-dollar notes gravely.  The boys' eyes began to shine.  Father 'most
always paid them, after haying, but--five dollars apiece!  Old Tilly
pursed his lips and whistled softly.  Kent nudged Jot.

[Illustration: He sorted out three five-dollar notes gravely.]

"There you are!  You needn't mind about giving receipts!" Father Eddy
said matter-of-factly, but his gray eyes were a-twinkle under their
cliffs of gray brows.  He was exulting quietly in the delight he could
read in the three round, brown faces.  Good boys--yes, sir--all of them!
Wasn't their beat in Hexham county--no, sir!  Nor yet in Marylebone
county or Winnipeg!

"Now, on with you--scatter!" he laughed.  "Mother and I are going to
mill to celebrate!  When you've decided what you're going to do, send a
committee o' three to let us know. Mind, you can celebrate any way you
want to that's sensible."

The boys waited till the tall, stoop-shouldered figure had gone back
into the dim, hay-scented barn, then with one accord the din began
again.

"Hoo-ray!  Hoo-ray for father!"

"Father! father! hoo-ray!"

"Hoor-a-ay!"

It died away, began again, then trailed out to a faint wail as the boys
scuttled off round the barn to the orchard. Father smiled to himself
unsteadily.

"Good boys! good boys! good boys!" he muttered.

"Come on up in the consultery!" cried Kent excitedly.

"Yes, come on, Old Till; that's the place!" Jot echoed.

The "consultery" was a platform up in the great horse-chestnut tree.
When there was time, it could be reached comfortably by a short ladder,
but, in times of hurry, it was the custom to swing up to it by a
low-hanging bough, with a long running jump as a starter.  To-day
they all swung up.

"Oh, I say, won't there be times!" cried Kent.  "Five apiece is fifteen,
lumped.  You can celebrate like everything with fifteen dollars!"

"Sure--but how?" Old Tilly asked in his gentle, moderate way.  "We don't
want any old, common celebration!"

"You better believe we don't!"

"No, sir, we want to do something new!  Camping out's old!"

"Camping's no good!  Go on!" Jot said briefly.  It was always Old Tilly
they looked to for suggestions.  If you waited long enough, they were
sure to come.

"Well, that's the trouble.  I can't 'go on'--yet.  You don't give a chap
time to wink!  What we want is to settle right down to it and think out
a fine way to celebrate.  It's got to take time."

For the space of a minute it was still in the consultery, save for the
soft swish of the leaves overhead and roundabout.  Then Jot broke out--a
minute was Jot's utmost limit of silence.

"We could go up through the Notch and back, you know," he reflected.
"That's no end of fun.  Wouldn't cost us all more'n a fiver for the
round trip, and we'd have the other ten to--to--"

"Buy popcorn and 'Twin Mountain Views' with!" finished Kent in scorn.
"Well, if you want to dress up in your best fixin's and stew all day in
a railroad train--"

"I don't!" rejoined Jot, hastily.  "I was thinking of Old Till!"

Tilly's other name was Nathan, but it had grown musty with disuse.  He
was the oldest of the Eddy trio, and "ballasted" the other two, Father
Eddy said.  Old Tilly was fourteen and the Eddy twins--Jotham and
Kennet--were twelve.  All three were well-grown, lusty fellows who could
work or celebrate their liberty, as the case might be, with a good will.
Just now it was the latter they wanted to do, in some untried way.

It was a beautiful thinking-place, up in the consultery. The birds in
the meshes of leaves that roofed it over twittered in whispers, as if
they realized that a momentous question was under consultation down
below and bird-courtesy demanded quiet.

Jot fretted impatiently under his breath,

"Shouldn't think it need to take all day!" he muttered. "You're as slow
as--as--"

"Old Tilly!" laughed Kent.  The spell of silence was broken, and the
birds overhead broke into jubilant trills, as if they were laughing,
too.

"I guess the name fits all right this time," Old Tilly said ruefully.
"I can't seem to think of anything at all! My head clicks--the mowing
machine wheels have got into it, I guess!"

"Wheels in mine, too!" Kent drawled lazily.

"Wheels!"

Jot sprang to his feet in excitement. In his haste he miscalculated the
dimensions of the consultery.  There was a wild flutter of brown hands
and feet, and then the chestnut leaves closed calmly over the opening,
and there were but two boys in the consultery.  One of those parted the
leaves again and peered down.

"Hello, Jot!"

No answer.  Old Tilly's laugh froze on his face.

"Jot! Hello!" he cried, preparing to swing himself down.

"Hello yourself!" came up calmly.

"Oh! Are you killed?"

"'Course!  But, I say, you needn't either o' you sit up there any longer
gloomin'.  I've thought of the way we'll celebrate.  It's great!"

The crisp branches creaked as the others swung down to the ground in
haste.

"You haven't!" cried Kent.

"What is it, quick!" Old Tilly said.  Old Tilly in a hurry!

"Wheels!" announced Jot, deliberately.  "You chaps had 'em in your head,
and that put 'em into mine.  Yes, sir, we'll celebrate on wheels!"

"Why, of course!  Good for you!" shouted Kent.  But Old Tilly weighed
things first in his mind.

"That would be a go if we had enough to 'go' round.  But you twinnies
wouid have to ride double, or spell each other, or something."

"Spell nobody!" scornfully cried Jot.

"N-o, no, b-o-d--"

"Shut up, Kent!  That's all right, Old Till.  Benny Tweed'll lend me his
bike just like a book--I know Ben! Besides, he owes me a dollar and I'll
call it square. There!"

Old Tilly nodded approvingly.  "Good!" he said. "Then we'll take a trip
off somewhere.  That what you meant?"

"Sure!  We'll go Columbus-ing--discovering things, you know."

"Like those fellows--what's their names?--who did errands for people,
and had wonderful things happen to them while doing them!" put in Kent,
enthusiastically.

"Errands?  What in the world--knights?  He means knight-errants!"
exclaimed Old Till, laughing.

"That's a good one--'Did errands for folks!'" Jot mocked.

"Well, what did they do then, Jotham Eddy?"

"Why, they--er--they--they rode round on splendid horses, all armed--
er--aaple-pie--and--"

"Apple-pie--armed with apple-pie!"

Old Tilly came briskly to the rescue.

"Never mind the errands or the pie!" laughed he. "We'll be reg'lar
knights and hunt up distressed folks to relieve, and have reg'lar
adventures.  It will be great--good for Jot!  We won't decide where
we're going or anything--just keep a-going.  We'll start to-morrow
morning at sunrise."

"Hoo-ray for to-morrow morning!"

"Hoo-ray for sunrise!"

"Hoo-ray for Jot!" finished Kent, generously forgetting mockeries.

The plan promised gloriously.  When father and mother came home from the
mill they fell in with it heartily, and mother rolled up her sleeves at
once to make cakes to fill the boys' bundle racks.  They would buy other
things as they went along--that would be part of the fun.

In the middle of the night Jot got out of bed softly and padded his way
across to the bureau, to feel of the three five-dollar bills they had
left together under the pincushion for a paper weight.  He slid his
fingers under carefully.  What!  He lifted the cushion.  Then he struck
a match--two matches--three, in agitated succession.

The money was gone!




CHAPTER II.

Jot gasped with horror.  The last match went out and left him standing
there in the dark.  After one instant's hesitation he made a bound for
the bed.  "Kent! Kent! Wake up!" he whispered shrilly.  He shook the
limp figure hard.

"Thieves!  Murder!  Wake up, I tell you, Kent!  We're robbed!"

"M-m--who's rob--Oh, say, lemme alone!" murmured poor Kent, drowsily.

Jot shook him again.

"I tell you thieves!" he hissed in his ear.  "The money's gone!  Do you
hear?  It isn't under the pin-cushion where we left it!  It's gone!
We've been robbed, Kent Eddy!"

The limp figure strengthened as if electrified and rose to a sitting
position.  Kent's eyes flew open.

"What?" he cried.

"Get up quick, Kentie, and we'll wake Old Tilly up! Maybe we can catch
'em!"

"Catch who?  I wish you'd talk English, Jot Eddy!"

Old Tilly was slumbering peacefully, oblivious to thieves and
five-dollar bills alike.  It took a long time to wake him and longer
yet to make him understand the dire thing that had happened.

"Get up!  Get up!  We've got to catch 'em!" concluded Jot.

"Yes, the thieves--catch the thieves, you know!" Kent explained.  "I
don't s'pose you'll lie there all night and let 'em cut off with our
money, if you are Old Tilly!"

Then something funny happened. Anyway, it seemed funny to Old Tilly.  He
buried his face in the pillow and choked with laughter.

"It's gone to his head!" whispered Jot, in alarm.

"No, to his t-toe!" giggled Old Tilly, purple in the face.

"Yes, sir, he's crazy as a loon.  Let's call father, Jot!"

"Hold on!--wait!  It's all right, boys!  The money is, and I am, and
everybody is!  Just wait till I get my laugh out, won't you?"

"No, sir, but we'll wait till you get out o' bed and that's this very
minute!" Jot exclaimed wrathfully.  He was dancing up and down with
impatience.

Old Tilly slowly brought a lean, shapely leg into view from beneath the
sheet.  To the boys' amazement it was covered with a long black
stocking.  Old Tilly, like the other boys, had been barefooted all day.

"Thought I might as well get a good start in dressing!" he chuckled.
"Nothing like being read--"

"Oh, come off!"

"Well, I wish it would; there's something in the toe that hurts.  Ow!"

He drew off the stocking and gravely examined the snug little wad in the
toe.

"The money!" cried Kent.

"Yes, sir, the money!" Jot echoed in astonishment.

"Why, so it is!" Old Tilly said in evident surprise. "Then the thieves
didn't get away with it, after all!  I call that a lucky stroke--my
getting partly dressed overnight!  No, hold on, you little chaps--don't
get uppy! I'll explain, honest I will!  You see, I got up after a while
and put the money there for safe-keeping.  I'd like to see the thief
that would look there for it!  He'd get a good kick if he did!"

It was half an hour later when the trio settled back into sleep again.
In the east already there were dim outriders of day trailing across the
darkness.

Without further incident the three knights-errant got under way next
day.  In a glare of July sunshine they rode away in search of
adventures, while Father and Mother Eddy in the kitchen doorway looked
after them a little wistfully.

"Bless their hearts!" mother murmured tender-wise.

"Good boys! Good boys!" said father, coughing to cover the break in his
voice.

"I say, this is great!" called Jot, who led the van, of course.  "This
is the way to do it!"

[Illustration:  "I say, this is great!" called Jot.]

"Yes, sir!" Kent cried in high feather, "it feels as if you were reg'lar
old knights, you know!  Isn't it jolly not to know what's going to
happen next?"

Old Tilly's wheel slid up abreast of Kent's and proceeded sociably.

"Esau Whalley's farm 'happens next,' and then old Uncle Rod King's
next," Old Tilly said calmly.  "I guess we better wait till we get out
o' this neck o' woods before we settle down to making believe!"

But three wheels driven by three pairs of sturdy, well-muscled legs get
over miles swiftly, and by ten o'clock the boys had turned down an
unfamiliar road and were on the way to things that happened.  Before
noon knightly deeds were at their hand.  Jot himself discovered the
first one. He vaulted from his bicycle suddenly, as they were bowling
past a little gray house set in weeds, and the others, looking back, saw
him carrying a dripping pail of water along the path to the kitchen
doorsteps.

"The pail was out there on the well curb, asking to be filled," he
explained brusquely, as he caught up with them, "and the old woman
pumping into it didn't look as if lugging water agreed with her.
Besides, I wanted a drink."

"You didn't get one," retorted Kent, wisely.

Jot cast a sidewise glance upon him.

"I said I wanted one, didn't I?  Anybody can want a drink."

"And take your remedy.  Dose: lug one pail o' water for an old woman.
If not successful, repeat in ten min--"

Jot made a rapid spurt and left his teaser behind.  When Old Tilly had
come abreast of him again, he reached out a brotherly hand and bestowed
a hearty pat on his arm.

"Good boy!" he said, and unconsciously his voice was like father's,
miles back in the kitchen doorway.  It was the way father would have
said it.

"That's the way to do.  We'll pick up 'errands' to do for folks.  What's
the use of being knights?"

And Old Tilly's turn came next, in the way of driving the cows out of
somebody's corn patch and propping up the broken fence.  If it took but
a few minutes, what of that?  It saved a bent old man's rheumatic leg's,
and the gay whistle that went with it drifted into an open window and
pleased a little fretful child.

"My turn next!" shouted Kent, gliding away from them out of sight over
the brow of a hill.

"Good luck to you!" called Jot.  "We're going into camp to take a bite.
No use being in such a rush."

"When you come my way, drop in!" floated back faintly. They tilted their
wheels against trees and threw themselves down in the shade to rest.
Jot was ravenous with hunger.

"Cakes are all right to begin on," he said, regarding mother's bountiful
store with approval.  "But when I strike the next store you'll see the
crackers and cheese fly!"

"I don't mind taking a hand in the scrimmage myself!" laughed Old Tilly,
munching a fat cake.  "I say, wasn't Kent foolish to go scooting off
like that?  Might as well have begun easy.  I move we ride nights and
mornings mostly, and loaf noons.  There's a moon, 'silver mo-oo-on'--"

His voice trailed lazily into song.  It was pleasant lounging in the
shade and remembering the hay was all in and adventures ahead.

An hour or so later they moved on at a leisurely pace, looking for Kent.
The general direction had been agreed upon, so they experienced no
anxiety.  It added to the fun to hunt for him.

"Where in the world did he go to?" queried Old Tilly, laughing.  "He
disappeared like a streak of lightning!"

"I see him--there, under that tree!" cried Jot, waving a salute.  "He's
lying down and enjoying life."

But it was a tired old man under the tree, and, from his forlorn face,
he did not seem to be "enjoying life."  He was very old, very shabby,
very tired.  His unkempt figure had collapsed feebly by the way
apparently.  What astonished the boys was the wheel that lay on its side
near him. He did not look like a wheelman.

"Hold on.  Old Till, I say!" called Jot in sudden excitement, forging
ahead to his side.  "I say, that looks like our wheel--mine and Kent's!
I guess I know our wheel!"

Jot was riding the borrowed machine.  Kent had the one they owned
jointly.

"You're right, sonny; it looks that way!" rejoined Old Tilly, excited in
his turn.  "But we can't pounce on it and cut, you know.  How do we know
what Kent's up to?"

Jot grunted derisively.  "Probably he's given it to the old duffer for a
birthday present--hundredth anniversary!" he scoffed.  "That would be
taking his turn at doing knight-errands.  Let's go right on and not
disturb the poor old man--"

"Let's have sense!" remarked Old Tilly, briefly. "We'll forge on ahead
and hunt Kent up before we arrest tramps for bike-lifting.  When he says
he's been robbed it'll be time to holler 'Stop, thief!'"

"Yes, come on!" Jot called back as he shot ahead. "I haven't a doubt but
we'll find Kentie's got his bike tucked away all safe in the toe of his
stocking!"

They came almost instantly into the outskirts of a snug little
settlement.  The road was flanked on both sides by neat white houses.
Trig little children scurried out of their way, cheering shrilly.
Somewhere there was music.  [Transcriber's note: the word "trig", above,
is as it appears in the original book.]

"Hark!" Jot cried.

"Hark yourself!  That's a good hand-organ," Old Tilly said; and he
hummed the familiar tune, and both wheels sped on to the time of it, as
it seemed.  The music grew louder.  "Look up in that dooryard, will you!
Jot Eddy, look at the chap that's grinding it!"

Jot uttered an exclamation of astonishment.




CHAPTER III.

Up in one of the shady side yards stood Kent, turning the crank of a
hand-organ!  He was facing the highway where the other two boys were,
but not a trace of recognition was in his face.  Ranged in a semicircle
before him was a line of little children shuffling their toes to the gay
tune.

"It's Kent!" gasped Jot.

"Or his ghost--pretty lively one!  Where in the world did he get that
hand-organ?  And what's he done with his bike?  Why--oh!"

Old Tilly added two and two, and, in the light of a sudden inspiration,
they made four.  Yes, of course, that was it, but he would wait and let
Jot guess it out for himself.  Jot had other business in hand just then.

"Say, come on up there with the youngsters, Old Till!" he whispered
excitedly.  "Come on, quick!  We'll make him smile!  He can't keep his
face with us tagging on with the children!"

They left their wheels beside the road and stalked solemnly up the path.
The children were too intent on the music to notice them, and the figure
at the crank did not change its stiff, military attitude.  The tune
lurched and swayed on.

Suddenly, with a sharp click, the music swept into something majestic
and martial, with the tread of soldiers' feet and the boom of drums in
it.  The faces of the little children grew solemn, and unconsciously
their little shoulders straightened and they stood "at attention." They
were all little patriots at heart and they longed to step into file and
tramp away to that splendid music.

Again the tune changed sharply, and still again.  Then the organ-grinder
slung his instrument with an experienced twist and twirl across his
shoulders, and took off his cap.

"Look, will you?  He's going to pass it round!" giggled Jot, under his
breath.  "He'll pass it to us, Old Till!"

"Keep your face straight, mind!" commanded Old Till, sharply.

The organ-grinder handed round his cap, up and down the crooked line of
his audience.  The two sober boys at one end dropped in a number of
pennies, one at a time deliberately,

"Bless ye!" murmured the organ-grinder, gratefully. Jot's brown face
tweaked with the agony of keeping straight, but Old Tilly was equal to
the occasion. He assumed a benevolent, pitying expression.

"Hold on a minute!" he called.  "Here's a nickel for your poor wife and
children.  How many you got?"

"Five, sir, your honor," the musician murmured thickly.

"Starving?"

"Sure--all but a couple of the little uns.  They're up 'n' dressed,
thank ye; bless ye!"

Jot made a strange, choking sound in his throat.

"Is the young gent took ill?" inquired the organ-grinder, solicitously.

"No, oh, no; only a slight attack of strangulating--he's liable to
attacks.  It was the music--too much for him!"' Old Tilly gravely
explained, but his lips quivered and struggled to smile.

The whole little procession trailed slowly down the lane to the street.
At the next house and at all the others in succession, it turned in and
arranged itself in line again, prepared to listen with ears and dancing
toes. Jot and Old Tilly followed on in the rear.  They found it hard
work to find pennies enough to drop into the organ-grinder's cap at
every round.  Toward the end they economized narrowly.

The small settlement came to an abrupt ending just over the brow of the
hill.  The houses gave out, and the musician and his audience swung
about and retraced their steps. The children dropped off, a few at a
time, until there were left only the three boys, who went on soberly
together.

"Oh, say!" broke out Jot at last.

"'Tis not for the likes o' me to 'say,' your honor," the organ-grinder
murmured humbly, and Jot gave him a violent nudge.

"Let's knock off foolin'!" he cried.  "I say, where'd you get that
machine, Kentie?  Where'd you get it?  And for the sake o' goodness
gracious, where's your wheel?"

"'Turn, turn, my wheel,'" quoted Kent from the Fourth Reader. He was
shaking with suppressed laughter, that turned into astonishment at Old
Tilly's calm rejoinder.  If it didn't take Old Till to ferret things
out!

"It isn't liable to 'turn, turn,' while that old tramp has it," Tilly
said calmly.  "He isn't built for a rider.  What kind of a trade did you
make, anyway?  Going halves?"

"No, going wholes!" Kent answered briefly, and would say no more.  They
went on down the sandy road.  When they got back to the forlorn old
figure under the tree, it was slowly rising up and regarding them out of
tired, lack-luster eyes.  The wheel still leaned comfortably in its
place close by.

"Me--bring--money.  Play--tunes.  You--buy--food," Kent said very slowly
and distinctly, pausing between every word.  "He's a foreigner, you
know," he explained over his shoulder to the boys.  "He no understand.
You have to talk pigeon English to him.  See how he catches on to what I
said?"

The old face had grown less dull and weary.  A slow light seemed to
illumine it.  As the little stream of pennies dripped into the
tremulous, wrinkled old hand, it suddenly flashed into a smile.  Then a
stream of strange words issued from the old man's lips.  They tripped
over each other and made weird, indistinguishable combinations of sound,
but the boys translated them by the light of that smile.  How pleased
the old fellow was!  How he fingered over the pennies exultantly!

"Tell the whole story, old man," Old Tilly said quietly as they mounted
their wheels and glided off.  "It looks like a reg'lar novel!"

"Yes, hurry up, can't you!" impatiently Jot urged. "Begin at the
beginning, and go clear through to the end."

"You've helped folks.  Why shouldn't I?  There weren't any old ladies
with empty water pails, or any cows in corn lots, so I had to take up
with the poor old organ-grinder.  That's all."

"All!" scoffed Jot, "Go on with the rest of it, Kent Eddy!"

"Isn't any 'rest,'" grunted Kent, "unless you count the organ-grinder;
he had some-looked as if he'd rested. Well, sir"--Kent suddenly woke
up--"but without any fooling, you ought to have seen that old chap when
I came on him.  He was all used up--heat, you know.  There was a creek,
back a ways, and the water kind of pulled him up.  He couldn't talk
English, but he offered me a black two-cent piece for pay.  He turned
his pocket out to find it.  That set me to thinking I'd make him a
little richer."

"Of course!  Go on!" hurried Jot.

"Isn't any 'on.'"

"There's honor," Old Tilly cried softly.  "I say that was splendid,
Kentie!  I like that!"

Kent flushed uneasily.  Old Tilly's face looked like father's when he
said his rare, hearty words of commendation.

"Well, the organ-grinder likes it, too!" Kent laughed. "Now he can have
something to eat.  Poor old fellow! He couldn't have gone through all
those dooryards to save his life!  He was 'most sunstruck.  I told a
motherly old lady about him, at one of the houses, and she's going to be
on the lookout for him, and give him a snack of meat and bread."

They went on for half a mile quite silently.  Then, without warning.
Jot suddenly began to laugh.  He tumbled off his bicycle and collapsed
in a feeble heap.

"Don't anybody st-op me !" he cried.  "It's dangerous! I'm having one o'
my 'attacks'!"

The others joined in, and, for a little, the woods rang with boyish
mirth.

"It was rich!" stammered Jot.  "Passing the hat round capped it!"

"It was great!" laughed Old Tilly.  "You're an actor, Kentie!"

"Me! What are you?"

"Well, I can't grind a hand-organ and pass round the hat like that!"

"I could!" Jot cried, suddenly sobering down and going through the
motions of turning a crank with airy ease.  "It's 'most too easy for
me!"

The fun lasted until night.  It was Saturday, and they rode until sunset
without further stops.

"We'll rest awhile and then go on by moonlight," Old Tilly said.  "It
will be jolly and cool then.  Besides, we don't want to be on the road
to-morrow.  I promised mother I'd see that you all kept Sunday."

"And go to church ?" Jot said.

"Yes, and go to church, it there's one to go to anywhere," Old Tilly
rejoined quietly.  "I told mother I'd see that you fellows went to
church quiet and nice, if possible. She put in the extra collars and
neckties on purpose."

A long rest, with a hearty lunch, and then they were off again in the
clear moonlight.  It was splendid.  The trees, the road, the pale,
ghostly houses--everything had a weird, charmed aspect.  They might have
been riding through fairyland.  It was growing late, they knew, and at
last they stopped, out of sheer weariness.

A great, square bulk loomed faintly before them in the waning moonlight.
It might be a house--might be a mountain! Jot spurted on ahead to
reconnoiter.

"House!" he shouted back. "Doors open--all quiet--guess it's on a picnic
ground.  I felt a stair that seemed to lead up to a balcony or
something."

"Well, we're sleepy enough.  We'll take anything we can get!" yawned
Kent.

"Come on, then."

And, riding into what seemed a yard, they found a good place for their
wheels under some bushes.  The moon was too low to give them any light,
but the boys found the doorway to the big building and went up the
stairs, guided by their hands along the narrow passageway. They could
only discern a queer little enclosure, topped by a little rail.  They
were too thoroughly tired out to be curious, and, feeling some narrow
seats, they lay down, and, making themselves comfortable, were soon
asleep.

Jot was dreaming that Old Tilly had made him go to church and the people
were singing, when suddenly he opened his eyes.  Was he dreaming?  Over
him floated a sweet hymn, one his mother loved to join in singing at
church Sunday morning.  The boy's eyes opened wider still at sight of
flecks of sunshine dancing on the walls near, and, raising his head, he
saw through the clear little panes of a long window, where the green
leaves were dancing against the glass.  The singing went on, and the boy
raised himself in a wondering fashion upon his elbow.  Where were they?
Jot lifted his head still higher, and, glancing over the railing, he
looked down upon a goodly company.  The amazement on his face grew
greater instead of less.  They were in church!--that was sure.   Jot
looked back to his sleeping companions and held his breath as one of
them stirred uneasily.  What if he should roll off the bench?   The hymn
grew louder and sweeter, and Jot smoothed out his hair and straightened
his necktie and sat up straight.  The branches outside tapped the
narrow, small paned window near him, and from the open windows below the
sweet beauty of the summer morning stole in.  But as the minister rose
to give out his text, a sound from one of the boys back of him caused
Jot to turn.




CHAPTER IV.

Jot turned in his narrow seat there in the church gallery as he heard a
sound that made him think his brothers were waking.  But Old Tilly had
only stirred in his sleep and struck out a little jarringly against the
back of the narrow gallery pew.  Jot turned back and scanned the place
they had so innocently taken for their quarters the night before.  The
gallery pew they were in was like a tiny half-walled room, with seats
running around three sides and up to the queer door on the fourth side.
The walls of the pews were almost as high as Jot's head if he had dared
to stand up.

Kent stirred uneasily and threw out his arm with a smart rap against the
side.  Jot crept across to him in terror.  "Sh! Sh! Keep quiet! don't
breathe! You're in meeting!" he whispered.  "The minister's down there
preaching now!  Oh, sh!"

"Lemme--" But Jot's hand cut off the rest.  The other hand gently shook
Kent's arm.

"I tell you we're in meeting; don't make a sound!"

"Who's making a sound?" whispered Kent, now thoroughly awake. Was Jot
taken suddenly crazy?  Hark! who was that talking?

"If you don't believe me, raise your eye over that wall and sec what!"
whispered Jot eagerly.  He drew Kent up beside him and they peeped
carefully over.  Kent dropped back, as Jot had done, in sheer surprise.
The two boys gazed at each other silently.  It was too much for Kent,
though, and, to suppress a laugh, he stuffed his handkerchief in his
mouth.

Kent pointed to Old Tilly and smiled broadly.

"He promised mother he'd take us to meeting," he whispered, "and he's
done it!"

"Yes, but she wouldn't like to see him asleep in church!" Jot whispered
hack.

Below them the minister's deep voice tolled on solemnly. They could not
catch all the words.

"Come on!  I'm going to sit up like folks.  I want to hear what he's
saying," Jot whispered after awhile.

They smoothed their hair and tried to straighten collars and ties, and
then suddenly some of the people down below in the body of the church
glanced up and saw two boyish faces, side by side, in the gallery.  The
puzzle was beyond unraveling.  The women prodded each other gently with
their parasol tips and raised their eyebrows. The men looked blank.
When had those youngsters got up there in that pew?  One of the deacons
scowled a little, but the two quiet brown faces allayed his suspicions.
It wasn't mischief--it was mystery.

The sight that had met Jot's astonished eyes in the beginning was a
quaint one.  This was a new kind of a church!  At home there were rows
upon rows of red-cushioned seats, with the hymn books and fans in the
racks making the only break to the monotony.  Here the pews were all
little square rooms with high partitions and doors.  The hard board
seats ran 'way round them all, so that in some of them people were
sitting directly "back to" the minister!  Rows on rows of the little
rooms, like cells, jutted against each other and filled up the entire
space below save the aisles and the pulpit.

[Illustration: This was a new kind of church.]

And the pulpit!  Jot's eyes returned to it constantly in wondering
admiration.  There was a steep flight of stairs leading up to it on each
side, and an enormous umbrella-like sounding-board was poised heavily
above it.  The pulpit itself was round and tail and hung above the heads
of the congregation, making the practice of looking up at the good old
minister a neck-aching process.  Directly beneath the pulpit was a seat
facing the people.  It was empty now, but a hundred years ago, had the
lads but known it, the deacons had sat there and the "tithing-man,"
whose duty it was to go about waking up the dozers with his long wand.
It was called the Deacon's Seat, and if sometimes the deacons themselves
had dropped off into peaceful naps--what then?  Did the "tithing-man"
nudge them sharply with his stick, or was he dozing, too?

There are still a few of these old landmarks left in the country.  Now
and then we run across them and get a distinct flavor of old times, and
it is worth going a good many miles to see the inside of one of them.
By just shutting one's eyes and "making believe" a little, how easy it
would be to conjure up our dear old grandmothers in their great scoop
bonnets, and grandfathers with their high coat collars coming nearly to
their bald crowns! And the Deacon's Seat under the pulpit--how easy to
make believe the deacons in claw-hammer coats and queer frilled shirt
bosoms!

The people Jot and Kent saw were ordinary, modern people, and their
modern clothes looked oddly out of date against the quaint old setting.
Jot thought with a twinge of sympathy how hard the seats must feel, and
how shoulders must ache against the perfectly straight-up-and-down
backs. He felt a sudden pity for his great-grandmother and great-uncles
and aunts.

This especial old church, box-like and unchurchly without and ancient
within, was rarely used for worship except in the summer months.  Then
there were services in it as often as a minister could be found to
conduct them. The three young adventurers had stumbled upon it in the
dark and overslept out of sheer physical weariness. It was up in one of
the old choir pews in the high gallery they had wakened--or Jot had
wakened--to the strains of the beautiful hymn his mother loved.

The whole explanation was simple enough when it was explained.  Kent and
Jot worked it out slowly in their own minds.

Meanwhile Old Tilly slept on, and the sermon came to an end.  There was
another hymn and then the benediction. The people dispersed slowly, and
once more the big house was deserted.

Then Jot woke Old Tilly.  "I say," he cried, "I say, old fellow, wake
up!"

"Yes, I'm coming in a minute!" muttered Old Tilly.

"You'll be late for church," remarked Kent dryly, with a wink at Jot.

Old Tilly stirred and rose on his elbow.  Then he gave a bewildered look
around him.

"You're in church.  Didn't you promise mother you'd take us to church?"

"Yes."

"But you slept all through the service," said Kent, "and I shall tell
mother so!"

"Kent Eddy, what are you trying to get at?  How did we get here,
anyhow?" said Old Tilly, rising cautiously; and then, as he looked down
on the empty room below, standing to his full height, he said. "Well, if
I ever!" a laugh breaking through his white teeth.  "I should say we had
been in church!" he added.  "Why didn't you fellows wake me up?  What
did the folks think?"

"Oh, they only saw the two good boys sitting on the seat facing them!
We didn't say we had another one smuggled in under beside us.  But my!
You did rap the seat awfully once with your elbow!"

"Well, I know one thing: my shoulder aches from lying on that narrow
seat so long," said Old Tilly.  "I say, let's go down to the wheels and
the grub.  I'm half starved!"

"All right," said Kent in rather a subdued way.  The morning service had
stolen pleasingly through him, and somehow it seemed to the little lad
as though their ship had been guided into a wonderfully quiet harbor.
And now he followed his brothers down the narrow stairs that they had so
innocently groped their way up in darkness the night before.  The three
had agreed to leave the church and partake of the lunch that was in the
baskets on the wheels, but now they found doing so not as easy of
accomplishment as they had at first thought.  When they tried the outer
door they found to their dismay that it was locked.  Old Tilly would not
believe Kent, and he pushed the latter's hand off the door knob rather
impatiently.  "Let me get hold of it!"

But, rattle the door as he might, he could not stir the rusty lock.

"Well, we're locked in, that's sure!" said Kent, looking almost
dismayed.




CHAPTER V.

"I guess you're right, Jotham," Old Tilly said.

"But what in the world did they go and lock up for, when we got in just
as easy as pie last night?" exclaimed Kent, disgustedly.

"Oh, ask something easy!" Jot cried.  "What I want to know is, how we're
going to get on the other side o' that door."

The care-taker, if one could call him that, of the old meeting-house,
had taken it into his head to take care of it!--or it may have been that
the key chanced to be in his pocket, convenient.  At all events, the
door was securely fastened.  The three boys reluctantly gave up the
attempt to force it.

"Windows!" Kent suddenly exclaimed, and they all laughed foolishly.
They had not thought of the windows.

"That's a good joke on the Eddy boys!" Old Tilly said. "We sha'n't hear
the last of it if anybody lets on to father."

"Better wait till we're on the other side of the windows!" advised Kent.
"Maybe it isn't a joke."

There were windows enough.  They were ranged in monotonous rows on all
sides of the church, above and below. They all had tiny old-fashioned
panes of glass and were fastened with wooden buttons.  It was the work
of a minute to "unbutton" one of them and jump out.

"There!" breathed Jot in relief, as his toes touched sod again, "I feel
as if I'd been in prison and just got out."

"Broken out--that's the way I feel.  I wish we could fasten the window
again," Old Tilly said thoughtfully.

Kent was rubbing his ankle ruefully.

"It was a joke on us, our mooning round that door all that time, and
thinking we were trapped!"

"Oh, well, come on; it doesn't matter, now we're free again."

"Come along--here are our wheels all right," Old Tilly said briskly.
"Let's go down to that little bunch of white houses there under the
hill, and pick out the one we want to stay over night in."

"The one that wants us to stay in it, you mean!  Come on, then."

It was already mid-afternoon.  The beautiful Sunday peace that broods
over New England's country places rested softly on new-mown fields and
bits of pasture and woods.  The boys' hearts were made tender by the
service they had so unexpectedly attended, and as the beauty of the
scene recalled again the home fields, they fell into silence.  A tiny,
brown-coated bird tilted on a twig and sang to them as they passed.  The
little throat throbbed and pulsated with eager melody.

Old Tilly listened to the song to its close, then swung round suddenly.
His face was like father's when he got up from his knees at family
prayers.

"That bird seems singing, 'Holy, holy, holy,'" Old Tilly said softly.
"Can't you hear?"

"Yes, I hear," murmured Jot.

The little white house they picked out sat back from the highway in a
nest of lilac bushes.  It reminded the boys a very little of home.

"Stop over night?  Away from home, be ye?  Why, yes, I guess me an' pa
can take you in.  One, two--dear land! there's three of ye, ain't there?
Yes, yes, come right in!  I couldn't turn three boys away--not three!"

The sweet-faced old woman in the doorway held out both hands
welcomingly.  She seemed to get at the history of the three young
knights by some instinctive mind-reading of her own--the boys themselves
said so little. It was the little old lady's sweet voice that ran on
without periods, piecing Old Tilly's brief explanatory words together
skillfully.

"Havin' a holiday, be you?  I see.  Well, young folks has to have their
outin's.  When they git as old as me an' pa, they'll be all innin's!"
she ran on.  Suddenly she stooped and surveyed them with a placid
attempt at sternness. "I hope you've all be'n to meetin'?" she cried.

Jot's face twisted oddly.

"Yes," Old Tilly answered, subduedly, "we've been to church."

"I thought so--I thought so.  Now come in an' see pa--poor pa'  He was
took again yesterday.  He's frettin' dretfully about the hay.  Pa--"

Her voice went on ahead and heralded their coming. "Here's three boys
come to stop over night with us--three, pa.  You're glad there's three
of 'em, ain't you? I knew you'd be.  When I'd counted 'em up, I didn't
hesitate any longer! The littlest one looks a little mite like our Joey,
pa--only Joey was handsome," she added innocently.

Kent nudged Jot delightedly.  They were entering a quaint, old-fashioned
room, and at the further end on a hair-cloth settle lay a withered
morsel of an old man.  His sun-browned face made a shriveled spot of
color against the pillows.

"That's pa," the little old lady said, by way of introduction. "He was
took yesterday, out in the field.  It was dretful hot--an' the hay 'most
in, too.  He's frettin' because he couldn't 've waited a little mite
longer, ain't you, pa?  I tell him if the boys was here--"  She broke
off with a quiver in her thin, clear voice.  Pa, on the couch, put out
his hand feebly and smoothed her skirt.

"We had three boys--ma an' me," he explained quietly. "That's why ma was
so quick to take you in, I guess. They was all little shavers like you
be."

"Yes, jest little shavers," said ma, softly.  "They hadn't got where I
couldn't make over 'em an' tuck 'em in nights, when they was took away--
all in one week. You wouldn't have thought 'twould have be'n all in one
week--three boys--would you?  Not three!  I tell pa the Lord didn't give
us time enough to bid 'em all good-by. It takes so long to give up
three!"

Old Tilly and the others stood by in odd embarrassment. Jot was bothered
with a strange sensation in his throat.

But the old lady's sorrowing face brightened presently. She bustled
about the room busily, getting out chairs and setting straight things
crooked in her zeal.

"I guess you're hungry, ain't you?  Boys always is--an' three boys!
Dear! how hungry three boys can be! I'm goin' out to get supper.  Pa,
you must do the entertainin'."

The bread was "just like mother's"--white with a delicious crust--and
the butter yellow as gold, and Jot helped himself plentifully.  "Ma,"
behind the tea urn, watched him with a beaming face.

"That's right!--I love to see boys eat!  I tell pa sometimes I can just
see our three boys settin' at this table eatin' one of ma's good meals
o' victuals.  You must have some of this custard, Joey."  A faint
essence of added tenderness crept into the wistful old voice at that
name. The boys knew that Joey had been the little old lady's baby.

"Joey was a great hand for custard.  Joey was a master hearty boy."

After supper, the boys wandered out around the tiny farm. It was at best
a rocky, uneven place, but there were evidences of "pa's" hard work on
it.  Most of the grass had been mowed and carried into the barn, but
there was one small field still dotted over with cocks of overripe hay.
Old Tilly strode over and examined it with an air of wisdom.

"Too ripe," he commented.  "I guess it won't be worth getting in, if it
stays out here much longer."

"He meant to have it all in yesterday--she said he did. I mean that
little old lady said so," Jot remarked.

"Well, if it isn't all in to-morrow, it's a goner," Old Tilly said
decisively.

"Now, boys, there's lots o' good water out in the cistern," the old lady
said, when they came back.  "I've put the towels handy in the shed.  It
may be you'll sleep sounder if you have a nice sponge off."

Only too glad, the boys took to the shed, and then followed their guide
to the airy room waiting.  How the pillows fitted a fellow's head! as
Jot said luxuriously. And the beds, how good they felt after those hard
church pews!  They were sound asleep in a moment.

The little old lady stole in to look at them. She held the lamp high in
one hand and gazed down with wistful eyes into the three healthy brown
faces. When she went back to pa, her face was wet with a rain of tears.

"They look so good, pa, lyin' there!" she said brokenly. "An' you'd
ought to see how much like Joey the littlest one throws up his arm!"

The old man could not sleep.  He kept asking if it looked like rain and
kept fretting because he could not move his legs about freely.

"I've got to move 'em, ma," he groaned.-"I've got to practice before
to-morrer, so's to get the hay in.  I've got to get the hay in, ma!"

It was Jot, for a wonder, who slept the longest.  He woke with a start
of surprise at his strange surroundings. Then he sat up in bed, blinking
his eyes open wider. The room was a large one with two beds in it.  He
and Kent had slept in one, and Old Tilly in the other.  It was just
before sunrise, and in the east a wide swathe of pink was banding the
sky.  Outside the window, a crowd of little birds were tuning up for a
concert.

Jot rubbed his eyes again.  There was no one else in the room.  The
other boys had vanished completely.  He leaped out of bed with a queer
sense of fright.  Then he made a discovery.




CHAPTER VI.

"Come on--haying's begun," the note read.  It was in Kent's angular,
boyish hand, and Jot found it pinned conspicuously to the looking-glass
frame. "Old Till and I are at it.  Come on out."

So that was it?  They were getting in the poor little morsel of an old
man's hay.  Jot jumped into his clothes with a leap and was out in the
hay-field with them.  He was inclined to be cross at being left dozing
while the work began.

"I call that shabby mean," he protested.  "Why couldn't you wake a
fellow up?  I guess I'd like a hand in helping the old man out, as well
as either of you."

"Wake you up!" laughed Kent.  "Didn't I tickle the soles of your feet?
Didn't I pinch you?  What more do you want?"

"You wouldn't wake up, Jot," Old Tilly said cheerfully. "I took a hand
at it myself, but nothing this side of a brass band would 've done it
this morning.  We couldn't bring that in, you know, for fear of waking
the folks.  So Kent wrote you a letter."

The work went on splendidly.  They were all in fine haying trim, and the
cocks in the rough little field were tossed briskly into the rack.
There were three loads, and the last one was safely stowed in the haymow
before the little old lady in the house had stirred up her breakfast
cake.

[Illustration:  They were all in fine haying trim.]

"I hope she won't discover anything before we get away," Old Tilly said.
"It would be such fun to have it a reg'lar surprise!"

"Wouldn't it!" cried Jot.

"But she might think somebody'd come along in the night and stole it,
don't you see?" Kent objected.

"No, sir, I don't see.  I guess she'd see our trail.  And besides, look
up there in the mow!  It doesn't look just exactly as it did before we
began!"

A few minutes after the boys had glided away on their wheels, the little
old lady hurried into "pa's" room.

"Pa, pa, it's all in, jest as nice as a new pin!  Every spear's in!" she
cried delightedly.  "Them three boys did it before breakfast.  I knew
what they was up to, but I wasn't goin' to spoil their little surprise!
I guess I know how boys like surprises.  Don't you remember how Hilary
an' Eben got the potatoes all dug that time an' surprised you?  How
innocent their little faces looked when you said, 'Hum-suz-a-day! how it
makes my back ache thinkin' o' those potatoes!'  Joey was a tittle thing
in kilts, but he helped.  He tugged 'em in, in his own little basket--I
can see jest how proud he looked!  But I evened up a little on the
surprise.  I guess when they come to open them bicycle baskets they'll
see some things in the way of apple-pie that was not there earlier!"

All the morning the boys wondered at the stream of wagons traveling
their way.  Then just at noon they found out what it meant.  They came
round a sharp curve in the road upon a beautiful grove on the shore of a
lake.  It was gay with flags and the bright dresses of women and
children. Here and there an awning or tent dotted the green spaces.
People were bustling about in all directions, laughing and shouting to
each other, and every few minutes there were new arrivals.

"Hark! there's a band o' music!  It's a circus!" cried Kent, excitedly.
Jot had disappeared somewhere in the crowd.

"No-o, not a circus," Old Tilly said doubtfully.  "It's some kind of a
big picnic.  See, there's a kind of a track laid out over there where
that flag is.  They're going to have some kind of athletics."

"Foot-races and hurdles and things!  Oh, I say, can't we stay and see
'em?" Kent cried eagerly.

At that instant appeared Jot, waving his cap in great excitement.

"Come on--we're invited!" he shouted.  "There's going to be lots of fun,
I tell you!  We can buy ice-cream, too, over in that striped tent, and
there are boats we can hire to row out in, and--everything."

"Hold on a minute!" demanded Old Tilly with the sternness of authority.
"How did you get your invitation? and what is it that's going on,
anyway?"

"Tell quick, Jot--hurry! They're getting ready for a foot-race,"
fidgeted Kent.

"It's a Grangers' picnic, that's what.  And a big jolly Granger invited
us to stop to it.  He asked if we weren't farmer boys, and said he
thought so by our cut when I said, yes sir-ee.  He wants us to stop.  He
said so.  He says his folks have got bushels of truck for dinner, and we
can join in with them and welcome."

"And thanking him kindly, I'll stop!" laughed Kent, in high feather.
"Come on over there, Jot, and see 'em race."  And the three young
knights were presently in the midst of the gay crowd, as gay as anybody.

The afternoon was full of fun for them.  They made plenty of
acquaintances among the other brown-faced farmer boys, and entered into
the spirit of the occasion with the hearty zest of boys out holidaying.
They were a little careful about not being too free with their
spending-money.  "'Cause we're out on a long run, you know," Old Tilly
said.  But what they did spend went for their share of the entertainment
given so freely to them by the big Granger who had taken them in tow.
It was a day filled with a round of pleasure, as Jot had predicted.

The athletic contests on the primitive little race-track proved the
greatest attraction of all.  There were bicycle races after the
foot-racing and hammer-throwing and high jumping.  Jot longed to vault
into his own wheel and whirl round the track dizzily, like the rest of
them. He and Kent stood together close to the turning-point. They had
somehow drifted away from Old Tilly.

A new race began, and up at the starting-place there seemed to be a good
deal of hilarity.  The hearty laughs were tantalizing.

"What is it?  Why don't they come on and give us fellows a chance to
laugh, too?" exclaimed Jot, impatiently.

Kent was peering sharply between his hands.  He suddenly began to laugh.

"It's a slow race!" he cried.  "They're trying to see who can get
behind!  Come on up further where we can see. It'll be great!"

"Come along, then--hurry!" shouted Jot.

"It's a free-for-all.  Anybody can compete," somebody was saying as they
passed.  "But they've got to be slower than Old Tilly!"

"Can't do it!" whispered Jot. "Old Tilly can sit still on his bike."

"I hope he'll see the race," Kent panted.  "It would be mean if he
missed.  Here's a good place--there they come.  Look at 'em crawling
along like snails!  There's one chap clear behind.  Yes, sir, he's
standing still!"

Jot gave one look and uttered a shout:

"It's Old Tilly!"

"Jotham Eddy--no!"

"Look for yourself and see--ain't it?"

"Of course--no--yes, sir, it's Old Till, for a fact."

"And he's 'way behind--I told you there wasn't anybody slower'n Old
Tilly!  He's beating as fast as anything."

"As slow as anything.  Come on!  Let's cheer him, Jot."

They caught off their caps and cheered wildly.  Every-body else joined
in, catching at the name and laughing over it as a good joke.

"Hurrah--hurrah for Old Tilly!"

"Hip, hip, 'n' a tiger for Old Til-ly!"

The time-keeper called time, and Old Tilly descended from his victorious
wheel and bowed profoundly to his cheerers.  He walked away to join the
other boys with the exaggerated air of a great victor, and the people
shouted again.

"Oh, I say, that was rich, Old Till," gasped Jot. "That was worth a
farm!"

"What made you think of entering?" Kent laughed.

"Oh, I thought I would--I knew I could beat 'em," Old Tilly said
modestly.

Sunset ended the festivities in the grove, and the boys mounted and rode
away with the other tired people. Gradually they fell behind.

"Don't--rush--so; I've got to keep up my reputation!" said Old Tilly.
"Besides, I'm tired."

"Me, too."

"Same here.  Let's camp out to-night in the woods. Why didn't we stay
there and camp in that grove?"

"Well, we might have, but we won't go back," answered Old Tilly.  "Come
on, let's make for that pretty little brown house.  Maybe we can buy our
supper there."

But the little brown house was shut up tight.  The curtains were all
pulled down, and a general air of "not at home" pervaded even the
clapboards and the morning-glory vine over the door.  Only the neat
little barn looked hospitable.  Its doors stood open wide.  A distant
rumble of thunder suddenly sounded, and the sky darkened with ominous
swiftness.

"Going to rain," Kent said.

"Sure," added Jot.  "Look at those clouds, will you? We'd better get
into a hole somewhere."

"We'll go into the barn," decided Old Tilly, after a minute's thought,
"and if it rains all night, we'll stay there.  We can't do any harm."

It rained all night.  Shower after shower burst over them heavily, and
there was a continual boom of thunder in their ears.  A slight respite
at midnight was followed by the most terrific shower of all.  The boys
huddled together in the hay, with awe-struck faces, but unafraid. They
could not sleep in such a magnificent tumult of nature.

Suddenly there was a blinding flash of lightning, then a crash.  The
whole universe seemed tottering about them. Dizzy and stunned, they
gazed at each other, unable to move for an instant.  Then it was Jot who
sprang up in tremulous haste.

"I smell smoke--we're afire!" he exclaimed.

"Yes," Old Tilly cried, striving to be calm, "it struck this barn."




CHAPTER VII.

They darted away in search of the fire.  The glare of the lightning
showed them their way, and presently they came into the glare of the
flames.  The bolt had descended through the harness room.

"Quick!  Cattle first!" shouted Old Tilly, clearly. "We must save the
cattle, anyway!"

"You go to them, you two--I'm going to the pump," called back Kent,
decisively.  He remembered there was a pump just outside the barn, and
he was sure he had seen two or three pails standing about near it--yes,
there they were!  He caught them up with a sweep as he leaped by. It was
the work of a moment to fill two pails and a moment more to dash them
down by the floor in one corner where the scattered hay was burning.
Again and again he made flying leaps to the pump and back.

Meanwhile the other two boys were releasing the frantic cattle.  It was
no simple thing to do--the poor creatures were so terrified.  There were
two steers and a gentle-faced heifer.  The boys had made acquaintance
with them the night before, and the poor things greeted them now with
piteous lows of appeal.

"So, boss--so boss--so-o!" soothed Jot at the heifer's head.  His
trembling fingers caressed the smooth, fawn-colored nose, as, with the
other hand, he untied her.  She crouched back at first and refused to
pass that terrible flaming something on the way to safety outside.  But
Jot pulled her along, talking to her all the way.

In less time than it takes to tell of it, the cattle were out of danger.

"Now the hens--hurry, hurry, Jot!  I'm going to help Kent.  It mustn't
get to the hay upstairs!"

Thanks to Kent's steady, tireless work, there was little danger of that
now.  Already the flames were greatly subdued, and only sputtered
aimlessly under the regular showers of water that fell upon them.  The
two boys toiled over them patiently till just a blackened corner told
that they had been there in the trig little barn.

It had been a short, sharp battle.  A moment's indecision, a very little
less determined effort and presence of mind, and nothing but a miracle
could have saved the barn.  And then the house!  It stood so near--what
could have saved it?

It was an hour or more before Old Tilly would allow the live stock
brought back into the barn.  They hovered anxiously over the blackened
embers, for fear they might spring into life again.  But at last there
seemed no danger, and presently the building settled back to quiet
again, and the tired rescuers tried to snatch a little sleep in the hay.
Jot woke the others in the first dim daylight.

"Fire! Fire!" he screamed.

"Where?  Where is it?" cried Kent, springing to his feet.

"Put--it--o-ut," mumbled Old Tilly.

It was only a nightmare, but the boys could not doze again after it.

It was just as the sun was rising clear and beautiful that the boys came
out from the barn, and as they caught sight of each other's blackened
faces in the dazzling light, they each gave way to a roar of laughter.
"Well, we all seem to be in the same boat," said Kent, making for the
pump and filling the pails one after the other.  "Here's a pail apiece;
that ought to do it for us."  Then he went to one of the wheel baskets
and brought back a crash towel and a generous piece of soap.  "Now lay
to on yourselves, boys, and then we will see what we can scare up for
breakfast.  I suppose there's no getting into the house, so we'll have
to depend on ourselves."  But here Kent noticed how particularly quiet
Old Tilly was.

"What's up, lad?" he said, as he plunged his face down into one of the
dripping pails, and then after scrubbing and sputtering for a while he
reached out blindly for a, towel, which one of the others tossed into
his hands. When his eyes were free, he drew a long breath, saying,
"Water fixes a fellow all right."  But as he did this he noticed
something that made him exclaim sharply.  It was the sight of Old Tilly
washing himself with one hand, while around the wrist of the other a
grimy handkerchief was bound.  "Why didn't you say you were hurt?" he
said, coming over to Old Tilly's side.  "What is it, anyway?"

"Oh, it's nothing," said Old Tilly, with an impatient nod of his head.
"Maybe it's where the lightning ran down," he said, with a laugh.

"Lightning!--not much!  Come, out with it.  What is it?"

"Oh, it's just a tear on an old nail.  One of those steers got a little
ugly, and I jumped back too suddenly.  It's nothing."

"We'll have to take your word for it," said Kent.  But he very soberly
turned to the lunch baskets.  It was just as they had packed up
everything neatly and were mounting their wheels to ride away, that a
wagon came rumbling down the grassy road and turned in to the farmyard.
A young man with a limp felt hat was on the seat with a woman wearing a
brown straw hat, while a tiny girl in a pink sunbonnet was nestled down
between them.

"Halloo!" said the man, as he saw the boys.  "Just leavin'?"

"Yes, sir," said Old Tilly, respectfully.  "We took the liberty of
sleeping in your barn last night.  You see the storm kept us there all
night."

"Well, the storm kept us, too," said the young farmer, reaching for the
little child and setting her down by the pump, and then helping the
woman to alight.

The young woman gave a relieved look around, first at the barn and then
at the house, and said delightedly:

"Oh, Jim, how good it does seem to see everything safe! I can't believe
my eyes hardly."  And she added, turning to the boys with a slightly
embarrassed laugh, "I never was very good to stay away from home nights,
and we didn't mean to stay last night, but the rain kept us.  It just
seemed to me that with every clap of thunder we'd find everything burned
to ashes, and the whole place gone."

Tears came into her eyes, as she turned and gave her hand to the little
child.  "Well, I'm going in to get breakfast," she said, a glad,
tremulous light showing across her face. "You better bring these boys in
to breakfast, Jim. If they've just slept in the barn they must be
hungry." Then turning back again with a heartier laugh, "I feel that
glad to see everything, even to the chickens, just as we left them, that
I wouldn't object to asking the President of the United States to
breakfast.  You ain't from around here, are you?" she asked, looking at
the boys. "I thought not.  And you're hungry, I'll wager," she said, as
she bustled away with the little girl tugging at her skirts, not waiting
for the boys to disaffirm, as they most assuredly would have done had a
chance been given them, for they were not in the least hungry.  But
then, what was a cold luncheon taken from a bicycle basket compared with
a warm breakfast that might include ham and eggs?

"She's awfully nervous, Nancy is," said the young farmer, a trifle
apologetically; "she would have it at brother Ed's that she was being
burned out of house and home.  We oughtn't to have stayed, but brother
Ed urged us to go home with him.  She's always that way when she's away.
We've ridden nineteen miles since daybreak, and she believed every mile
that we were going to see a burned-down house at the end."

"Well," said Old Tilly in a quiet way, so as not to alarm the young
farmer, "I guess she was about right this time.  If we hadn't happened
here--"  Then he slipped back into the barn, and the young farmer
followed after, and Old Tilly pointed to the blackened corner, while the
other two drew near interestedly.

"You see how it struck," Old Tilly said quietly, "but we put it out
after a while.  It is well we happened to be right here."

The young farmer was gazing at the burned place, with his jaw dropped
and a look of terror coming into his blue eyes.

"It did strike!  I should say it did!" he cried excitedly. "What will
Nancy say?"

[Illustration: "I should say it did strike!" he cried, excitedly.]

Then as a realization came to him that it was owing to the boys that
they had a roof over their heads, he turned first to one lad and then to
the other, and shook their hands heartily.  There were tears in his
eyes, but he did not seem conscious of them.  "I don't know what Nancy
'll say," he reiterated, as he shook one hand after the other up and
down like a pump handle.  "We'll have to be everlastingly obliged to you
for the rest of our days," he said, trying to laugh a little.  But his
voice choked, and he turned away to hide his emotion.  Then he dropped
down upon a corn-cutter and insisted on hearing the story from beginning
to end, although Old Tilly declared time and again, with the other two
joining in, that "It was nothing."

"You call it nothing?  Well, you wait until you've worked half a
lifetime, as Nancy and me have done, to get a place, and then see what
you think about it.  I guess Nancy 'll believe it's something."

Then he stopped as a clear call, "Breakfast! Breakfast!" came ringing
out to them from the open door beyond the pump. "Perhaps we'd better not
say anything about it until after breakfast.  She's had a powerful
uneasy night, and it's been a good bit of a ride over, too."

To this the boys assented, and the four walked across the yard to the
kitchen door, where the little girl was shyly waiting for them.

"Ain't you the young chap that beat in the bicycle slow race?" asked
Nancy, when she caught a sight of Tilly's face as he removed his hat.

The other two boys laughed, and the farmer, looking squarely at his
visitor, said:

"Well, I thought I'd seen you somewhere."

And then they settled down to breakfast in the happiest frame of mind,
evidently, that could be imagined.  But all the time Old Tilly kept one
hand down at his side, a little out of sight, and the boys noticed that
he took upon his plate only such things as he could very easily manage
with one hand.  The breakfast, for a hurried one, was very satisfactory
indeed.  Jot and Kent ate with full appreciation of it.

But had they watched closely, they would have seen how Old Tilly's face
now flushed and then grew pale, and that occasionally he brought his
lips together as though striving to control himself.

But, all unmindful of what the boy was undergoing, Nancy presided
merrily over the table, and kept prompting Jim to fill up the plates as
they needed it, and pressed this and that upon the boys' attention.

"I don't feel as if I should ever want to go away again," she cried.
"It's so good to be at home.  I've been through every room in the house
and taken a view of them all." And then she said laughingly, turning to
the boys, "Not that there are so very many of 'em, but they're all we've
got, you know.  After breakfast we're going out to the barn, ain't we,
Polly?" she added.

But now Kent noticed that Jot's face had suddenly sobered; he was
looking at Old Tilly anxiously; he had seen.  His hand come up from
beneath the table, and he was sure that the handkerchief was spotted
with red. "I say--Old Tilly--" Jot got to his feet hastily.

But Old Tilly's face was white, and he was swaying from side to side.
Old Tilly was fainting away.




CHAPTER VIII.

"I--I'm awake now.  What's the matter?  Who's sick?"

Old Tilly sat up dizzily.  He had lost consciousness only for a moment,
but his face seemed to be growing whiter and whiter.  Jot and Kent
hovered over him anxiously.

"You got kind of faint, Old Till--just for a minute. You're all right
now," Kent said.

"Of course I'm all right!--I always was!  I don't see what you're making
such a fuss about!" But the pale face belied his words.

Kent lifted the clumsily bandaged hand and unwound the handkerchief.  It
was stained with blood.

"Oh, what have you done, Kent!  You shouldn't have taken the bandage
off!" exclaimed Jot, in fright.  "See how the blood is dripping from the
cloth!"

"It's nothing, I tell you!" growled Old Tilly. "Wind the thing up again!
It's only a nail tear!"

Old Tilly was swaying again, and they forced him gently back.  The
little woman looked up startled.

"What is it, Jim?  How did it happen?" she quavered.

Jim's face looked very sober.  "I guess I better fetch the doctor," he
said. "He hurt it on a nail, he says.  I won't stop to harness up--Old
Betty's used to bein' rode bareback."

He hurried away, followed by his wife.  Jot was examining the torn wrist
tenderly.  Some new, untried strength seemed to spring into the brown,
boyish face.  It took on the lines of a man's.

"It's an artery, Kentie.  I know, because the blood leaps up so when the
handkerchief is off.  It can't have been bleeding all night.  I don't
understand."

"It bled some last night," said Old Tilly, "but I stopped it.  I guess I
hit it someway just now against the table. It began again worse than
ever.  Cover it up, can't you? It's--all--right!"

"It isn't all right!  Get me a little stick, quick, Kentie! No, that
fork'll do.  Hand it here.  This bleeding's got to stop."

It seemed odd that it should be Jot--little, wild, scatter-brained Jot--
who should take the lead in that calm, determined way.  What had come to
the boy?  With pale face and set teeth he quietly bound the handkerchief
tightly above the wrist, and, inserting the fork handle in the knot,
twisted it about.  The bleeding lessened--stopped.

"There!  Now, if I keep a good grip on it--oh, I say, Kentie, wasn't I
afraid I couldn't work it!" he said, breathing hard.

"I don't see how you did work it! I don't see how you ever thought of
it, Jot Eddy!"

"Well, I did.  I read how it was done, up in the consultery. Father may
laugh, but I'm going to be a doctor!"

Kent's face was full of new-born respect.  He suddenly remembered that
it was Jot who had set "Rover's broken leg and nursed the little sick
calf that father set such store by.

"I guess father won't laugh." Kent said soberly. Jot was sitting on the
edge of the lounge holding the fork in a firm grasp.   Old Tilly opened
his eyes and nodded approvingly.

"That's what I tried to do myself with the handkerchief--bind it tight.
It wasn't very bad at first, but I jerked it or something.  I didn't
want you fellows' good time spoiled."

"That's just like you!" burst out Kent.  "You never tell when you get
hurt, for fear other folks'll be bothered."

The little woman crept back into the kitchen and went quietly about her
work.

The doctor soon came, and in a brief time the artery was taken up and
the hand deftly bandaged.

"Which of you fellows made that tourniquet with the fork?" the doctor
asked brusquely.

Kent pointed proudly to Jot.

"Oh, it was you, was it?  Well, you did a mighty good thing for your
brother there.  He'd have lost plenty of blood before I got here if you
hadn't."

The whole of that day and the next night the boys remained at "Jim's."
The doctor had positively objected to Old Tilly's going on without a
day's quiet.

And the little woman--the little woman would not hear of anything else
but their staying!  She had been out to the barn with Jim and seen the
blackened corner.  After that she hovered over the three boys like a hen
over her chickens.

"For--to think, Jim!--it was saving our home he got hurt!" she cried.

The boys talked things over together, and Kent and Jot were for turning
about and going straight home. But not so Old Tilly.

"I guess!  No, sir; we'll go right ahead and have our holiday out.  It's
great fun cruising round like this!"

"But your hand, Old Tilly--the doctor said--"

"To keep it quiet.  He didn't say to sit down in a rocking-chair and
sing it to sleep.  I guess if I can't ride a wheel with one hand, my
name isn't Nathan Eddy!"

"It isn't'" laughed Kent.  "It's Old Tilly Eddy!"

But in the middle of the night a ghost appeared suddenly over Old Tilly.
The pale moonlight introduced it timidly as Jot, in his white shirt.  He
sat down on the bed.

"I'm going home," he announced in a whisper.  "You other fellows can do
as you like.  Of course you can ride all right with one hand, if you're
bound to.  But I sha'n't ride with three hands any further from home!
I'm going home!  I--I feel as if I must!"

Old Tilly sat up in bed.  "You sick, Jotham Eddy?" he cried.

"No--o, not sick--not reg'lar built!  But I tell you I'm going home.
It's no use saying anything--I've said it." "I believe you're sick;
you're keeping something back, Jot."

"Well, what if I am?  Didn't you keep something back yourself, till you
fainted away doing it?  I'm going--you and Kentie needn't, of course.  I
tell you I feel as if I must."

"He's sick, Kentie," Old Tilly said next morning. "There's something the
matter with him, sure, or he wouldn't be so set.  Don't you think he
LOOKS kind of pale-ish?"

"Pale-ish!" scoffed Kent.

"Well, something's up.  Mother put him in my care, and I'm going to take
him home.  I'd never forgive myself, and mother'd never forgive me, if
anything happened to Jot away from home.  I'm sorry on your account,
Kentie."

"Oh, go ahead! I'm all right," rejoined Kent, cheerfully. "I'd just as
soon.  We've had a jolly good time of it so far, and we can take the
rest of it out in going fishing or camping at home."

"Well, then we'll go right back home--on Jot's account. I feet as if I
must take him to mother."

Poor Jot!  It was hard to be taken home that way, when all the while
wasn't he taking wounded Old Tilly home to mother?  It was the only way
he had been able to work it out, lying awake and worrying over the torn
wrist.  Something must be done to get Old Tilly home.

"I told the truth--I said I was keeping something back," thought Jot.
"I said I wasn't sick, didn't I?  And Old Till's got to go home.  The
doctor told me the sooner the better."

But it was a distinct sacrifice to Jot's pride to be "taken home to
mother."  He bore it remarkably well because of the love and anxiety in
his sturdy little heart.  He would do a good deal for Old Till.

They returned by a more direct route than they had come.  On the way,
they discussed their adventures.  Jot counted them up on his fingers.

"Hand-organs, old churches, little old man's hay--pshaw! that wasn't an
adventure!" Jot blushed hotly, as if caught in some misdeed.

"No, skip that," Old Tilly said quietly.  "That just happened.  Begin
over again."

"Hand-organs, old churches (two adventures there, you know), picnics,
slow races--"

"Skip that!" cried Old Tilly.

"No, sir!  Slow races, burning barns, arteries--" "Oh, I say!  I'll do
the counting up myself!  Besides, you left out the very first adventure,
didn't you?"

"The very first one?"

"Yes, of course--losing all our money before we started!"

"Quits!" cried Jot, laughing.  He did not appear sick at all.  All the
way home he watched Old Tilly with almost professional care.  And Old
Tilly, unknown to Jot, watched him.

"Say, Jot," he said that night, when they had gone upstairs to their own
beds once more, "don't you feel a little better?"  His face was white
and tired, and he nestled in the pillows gratefully.  It was good to be
at home.  "Don't you feel a good deal better?"

"Me?" asked innocent Jot.  "I feel jolly!  Never felt--oh, er--I mean--
that is--"

"You're a rascal!" laughed Old Tilly, comfortably. "That's what you
mean.  Think I didn't surmise a thing or two?  Well, honest, I didn't,
at first.  But on the way home I found out what you were up to.  You
looked altogether too healthy!"

There was a moment's silence, then Jot spoke meekly. "I felt sort of
mean, but I couldn't help it, honest.  And I told the truth, now, didn't
I?  I was going to own up to-morrow."

He went away into the next room and crept into bed beside Kent.

"Jot!  Jot, I say!" called Old Tilly, presently.  "Hope you don't think
I'm mad.  I don't mind.  I--I like it."

There was an indistinct mumble of relief from Jot's quarter, followed by
another silence.  Then again Old Tilly's contented voice crept through
the dark.

"Say, Jot, you asleep?"

"Yes, you?"

"Sound!  It feels mighty good to be home, doesn't it?"

"Prime!"

"Good-night, old chap!"

"Same here!"

Then silence, unbroken.  By and by Mother Eddy stole upstairs to her
boys.

"Good boys, every one of them.  God bless them!" she murmured.  "Home
isn't home without them.  But young things must have their holidaying.
And I guess from what they tell, they've made good use of theirs.  And
it isn't everyone does that; some of them just waste it.  But this one's
held something in it.  I don't know just what.  But every one of them
seems--well, sort o' more manly-like.  I'm glad their pa let them go.
But home ain't home without boys in it.  That's sure."

And she turned and went softly down the stairs.





End of Project Gutenberg's Three Young Knights, by Annie Hamilton Donnell

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10901 ***
ehmaidhcdaIeART OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10513 ***

Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original lovely illustrations.
      See 10513-h.htm or 10513-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/0/5/1/10513/10513-h/10513-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/0/5/1/10513/10513-h.zip)




Cassell's "Eyes and No Eyes" Series, Seventh Book

ON THE SEASHORE

By R. CADWALLADER SMITH






With Eight Colour Plates And Many
Black-And-White Illustrations





CONTENTS


LESSON

   I. FIVE-FINGERED JACK

  II. A STROLL BY THE SEA

 III. BIRDS OF THE SHORE

  IV. CRABS

   V. SHRIMPS, PRAWNS AND BARNACLES

  VI. PLANTS OF THE SHORE

 VII. FLOWER-LIKE ANIMALS

VIII. SEA-WEEDS AND SEA-GRASS

  IX. THE JELLY-FISH

   X. SHELLS AND THEIR BUILDERS (1)

  XI. SHELLS AND THEIR BUILDERS (2)




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


COLOUR PLATES


TREASURES OF THE SEASHORE [Missing]

GULLS

THE REDSHANK

HERMIT CRABS FIGHTING

THE COMMON LOBSTER AND HERMIT CRAB

CRUSTACEA

WEST PAN SAND BUOY

SHELLS



BLACK AND WHITE ILLUSTRATIONS


COMMON FIVE-FINGERED STARFISH

TEST OR SHELL OF A SEA-URCHIN

THE CRAB

PURSE CRAB

HERMIT CRAB IN WHELK'S SHELL

HERMIT CRAB WITH SEA FLOWERS

THE LOBSTER

THE SHRIMP

SEA LILY

SEA ANEMONE

SEA-WEED FROND

SEA MAT

MEDUSA

A MEDUSOID

PRECIOUS WENTLETRAP

COWRIES







LESSON I.


FIVE-FINGERED JACK.

What fun it is down by the sea at low tide! Scrambling among the
slippery rocks, we quickly fill a bucket with curious things. Some are
dead, others very much alive; but all have a story to tell us--the story
of the life they lead on the bed of the sea, or among the sands and
rocks of the shore.

Look, here is a Starfish! It is lying on the sand, left high and dry by
the waves, for now the tide is low. The Starfish looks limp and
lifeless, its five reddish-coloured "arms" are quite still.

We know it is an animal that lives in the sea, and dies when washed
ashore. But what does it do in the sea? How does it move without legs or
fins? How can it live without a head? Has it a mouth? What does it eat,
and how does it find its food?

Like so many other sea-animals, the Starfish is a puzzle. Some of its
little tricks puzzled clever people until quite lately. But we know most
of its secrets now.

Pass your finger down one of its arms, or rays. It feels rough, being
covered with knobs and prickles. Now turn the Starfish over, and look
carefully at its underside. In the centre, where the five arms meet, is
the animal's mouth. A harmless sort of mouth, you think, too small to be
of much use. Really, it is a terrible mouth, the mouth of an ogre!

We notice a groove down the centre of each ray. But what are those
little moving things which bend this way and that, as if feeling for
something? Now that is exactly what they are doing. They are the feet of
the Starfish. Each tiny foot is really a hollow tube, which can be
pushed out or drawn in. At the tip of each is a powerful sucker, which
acts rather like those leather suckers boys sometimes play with. Suppose
the Starfish wishes to take a walk along the bed of the sea. First, it
pushes out its tube-feet. Each sucker fixes itself to a stone or other
object, and then the animal can draw its body along. You will see
presently that the suckers can do other work too.

Our Starfish will die, however, unless we carry it to a pool. Before
doing so, we must look at the tip of each ray for a small reddish spot.
That is the Starfish's eye. Are those little eyes of much use in helping
the creature to find its dinner? I think not. Most likely the Starfish
_smells_ its way.

If we put the animal on its back in a rock-pool we shall see the
tube-feet at work. Once in the water our Starfish revives, and makes
efforts to right itself. Can it turn over and crawl away?

The little tube-feet come out of their holes and begin to bend about.
Now those near the edge of one "arm" feel the ground. Each tiny sucker
at once takes hold, more and more of them touch the ground as the ray is
turned right side up, and at last the Starfish turns over, and, slowly
but surely, glides away.

[Illustration: COMMON FIVE-FINGERED STARFISH.]

Stones, shells, or rocks do not stop it. The rays slide up and over
them. If we had feet like those of the Starfish, a journey up the wall
of a house, over the roof, and down again, would be nothing to us.
Nature gives all creatures the kind of foot which suits the life they
lead. And it is hard to imagine feet more useful to the Starfish than
those wonderful sucker-feet!

Ask any fisherman what he thinks of the "harmless" Starfish, and he will
call it a pest and a nuisance. "It gets into the crab traps," he says,
"and eats all the bait. And when we are line-fishing it sucks the bait
off our hooks, and sometimes swallows hook and all." Small wonder that
Five-fingers, or Five-fingered Jack, as it is called, has no friend
among fisher-folk.

On pulling up a useless Starfish instead of a real fish, the fisherman
tears the offender in half and throws the halves back into the waves. By
doing this he harms himself more than the Starfish! Each half grows into
a perfect Starfish with five rays complete. We can say that each part of
this animal has a separate life, for each part can grow when torn away.

If you were asked to open an oyster you would need tools, would you not?
Even with an oyster-knife it is not always an easy job. The oyster,
tight in his shelly fortress, seems safe from the attack of a weak
Starfish. Yet the Starfish opens and eats oysters as part of its
everyday life.

Finding a nice fat oyster, it sets to work. The Starfish folds its rays
over its victim, with its mouth against the edge where the shells meet.
The tug-of-war begins. The Starfish's tube-feet try to pull the shells
apart; the oyster, with all its strength, tries to keep them shut. It is
stronger than its enemy, and yet the steady pull of hundreds of suckers
is more than it can stand, and the shells, after a time, begin to gape a
little.

Now a strange thing happens. The mouth of the Starfish opens into a kind
of bag which slips between the oyster shells. The Starfish, as it were,
turns itself inside-out! It then eats the oyster and leaves the clean
shell.

Mussels are smaller, so they are eaten in a different way. The Starfish
merely presses the mussel into its mouth, cleans out the shells, and
throws them away. Were we not right to call this wonderful mouth the
mouth of an ogre?

Oysters, as you know, are so valuable that we rear them in special
"beds." Along comes the hungry Starfish, with thousands of its
relations, finding the fat oysters very good eating. They do great
damage in our oyster-fisheries, and it is one long battle between them
and the keepers of the "beds."

Supporting the tough skin of Five-fingered Jack is a wonderful skeleton.
It is like a network of fine plates and rods made of lime. Perhaps you
have seen one in a museum.

Five-fingers has a great number of cousins, some of them common enough
along our shores. One of the strangest is the Brittle Star. On first
seeing one of these animals I tried to capture it by holding its long,
wriggling arms. At once the arms broke off. Then I tried to scoop the
creature out of its watery home. But it began to break its "rays" off as
if they were of no value whatever. To my surprise, the broken "rays"
broke again while wriggling on the ground. This is a strange habit, is
it not? Perhaps the Brittle Star has found this dodge useful in escaping
from enemies. Anyhow, the loss of an arm or two matters little, for
others grow in their place.

Another cousin of the Starfish is the Sea-urchin, a round prickly
creature rather like the burr of the sweet-chestnut tree. This mass of
prickles is not a vegetable; he is very much alive. Nature has given
many plants and animals these prickles, like fixed bayonets, for a
defence against their enemies. You will at once think of the gorse and
the hedgehog, or urchin, as some people call it. Our little Sea-urchin
has prickles, like the hedgehog, but he is really unlike any other
living creature, except, perhaps, the Starfish.

If you were to roll up a Starfish into a ball, and then stick about
three thousand spines on the ball thus made, you would have a creature
looking rather like a Sea-urchin.

Beneath the mass of spines there is a hard _test_ or shell, made of
plates joined closely together; this is the skeleton of the Sea-urchin.
Sometimes you find this strange shell on the seashore, rather dirty, and
not always sweet-smelling. You might also find Sea-urchins half-dead,
washed into the rock-pools. The shells are wonderful objects, so you
should clean them in fresh water; they are well worth the trouble of
taking home.

All over the shell you will see little rounded knobs. These show where
the spines were fixed on; each spine fits into a hole in the shell, but
so loosely that it is able to move about. The Sea-urchin can walk by
moving its spines, tilting its body along from one place to another on
the bed of the sea. It can do much more than that. Like its cousin the
Starfish, it has numerous tube-feet, so you would not be surprised to
see this prickly ball walk up the face of a rock.

The tube-feet, or sucker-feet, are fixed to the shell in much the same
way as the spines. They can be bent this way or that. If the Urchin is
on a rock he clings tightly with these sucker-feet; then, if he wishes
to move away, you will see the long thin tubes stretch out and bend
about. They fix themselves to the rock, and the animal is drawn along.

[Illustration: TEST OR SHELL OF A SEA-URCHIN.]

Besides these spines and suckers, the Sea-urchin owns another set of
tools. Scattered over it, among the spines, are many tiny rods tipped
with little teeth or pincers. You will not be able to see them, except
under a magnifying glass. Of what use are these strange little pincers
or rods? It is thought that the Urchin uses them in several ways. They
may help in capturing small prey, or they may be used when the creature
has to fight a larger enemy. They are also certainly of use as cleansing
tools. That is to say, they can pick off tiny scraps of weed or dirt
which settle on the animal's body. Some Starfishes also own pincers of
this sort, but they are not so perfect as those of the funny little
Urchin. We must not forget that all these spines, tube-feet, and pincers
are worked by a set of muscles.

In the centre of the Urchin's shell is its mouth. The Starfish, we
found, had a terrible mouth, but that of the Urchin is worse still. Not
only is it of great size, but it is fitted with strong jaws and five
long, sharp teeth, You may see them poking out from the mouth of the
animal, and feel for yourself how hard they are.

There is a great deal more to know about Five-fingers; and the
Sea-urchin still has his secrets which no one can explain. We have but
glanced at their story in this lesson; but you can see that the
Starfish, lying limp on the sands, is not so dull as it looks.


EXERCISES

1. Where is the mouth of the Starfish placed?

2. Describe how the Starfish moves.

3. How does the Starfish feed on the oyster?

4. Why is the _Brittle_ Star given that name?

5. How do the Starfish and Sea-urchin keep themselves clean?




LESSON II.


A STROLL BY THE SEA.

The sea and the land are always at war. When you are at the seaside,
with spade and bucket to make "castles" and "pies" of the sand, you can
see and hear the battle.

A wave comes rolling smoothly on towards the shore. It reaches the land
and can go no further, and then, with a roar and a crash and splash of
sparkling foam, it breaks. It spreads into a sheet of foaming water,
and, after rushing as far as it can up the beach, it seethes back as the
next wave takes up the battle.

What a grinding and tearing, as wave after wave is hurled at the land!
That is the battle-cry of the land and sea! Most of the pebbles and the
sand on the beach have been won from the land in the great fight. We
might call them the spoils of war. Once they formed part of the solid
land, the rock or cliff. Now they are loose fragments spread for mile
after mile round our coast.

Every wave takes them up and has fine fun with them. Pebbles and sand
are picked up, swirled along, and thrown at the shore. They are sucked
back as the wave is broken by the land. And then the following wave
takes them, grinds them and scrubs them together. Thus they are jostled
hither and thither, up and down the coast; and, as a result of the long,
long fight, rocks and cliffs become pebbles, sand, or mud.

Now if you look at the pebbles on the shore you see that many of them
are smooth and round. Some are as round as the "marbles" you play with.
No wonder, for the mighty sea has scoured them with sand and rolled them
for miles.

As you know, the sea is not always at the same height. It falls and
rises. Twice in every day it _ebbs_ and _flows_; we call this movement
of the sea the _tides_. At low tide we can explore the very bed of the
ocean. We can visit the homes of the living, breathing animals, which,
at high tide, are hidden far under water. Between the high-water mark
and low-water mark is our hunting-place. There we shall find the
play-ground and feeding-ground of many a strange creature.

Here is a stretch of sand, with little channels of water; there is a
patch of shingle mixed with numbers of tiny shells. The ebbing tide
leaves shallow pools in every hollow of the beach, and these pools are
often full of life.

Shrimps dart away and disappear in the sand as if by magic. Small fish
and crabs hide from you as best they can. Helpless jelly-fish and
starfish sprawl on the wet sand. What are those thin ropes of sand
coiled up into little mounds? They remind us of "worm-casts." They are
thrown up by a sand-worm, called "lug-worm" by the fisherman. He brings
a spade and digs wherever he sees the sandy ropes of the "lug," for this
worm makes good fishing bait.

Seagulls love to explore the shallow pools. You may see them walking
solemnly about, picking up stray morsels. If you see a screaming group
of them you can be sure that one has found an extra large prize, and the
others mean to share the feast.

Let us walk down the beach towards the sea. Soon we find ourselves among
rocks. Now these rocks are the bare bed of the shore, stripped of all
covering. There is no mud, sand, or shingle, so here you see plainly the
work done by the restless water. On every side you notice rocks worn to
all shapes and sizes. Some jut out as sharp ledges. Others are flat
tables, covered with a table-cloth of sea-plants. These clothe the
rocks, or hang over the ledges like wet, shining green curtains. Nearly
every rock has its crust of barnacles and clumps of mussels. If we are
not careful we slip on the wet weeds, and get a ducking in the pools
which lie everywhere among the rocks.

Here is the best place of all for sharp eyes to find the animals and
plants we seek. Where the hard rock has been worn down into hollows, the
falling tide leaves a pool of still, clear water. These rock-pools are
the home of many a creature. So let us look for them, until the rising
tide sweeps over the rocks once more, and drives us away.

Sea-anemones and seaweeds brighten the pool with their various colours.
Pretty shells gleam here and there; and on the face of the rock there
are more limpets, barnacles and mussels than we can count.

Where are the other living animals which we came to find? You will not
see them unless you hunt for them in the right way. It is a game of
"hide-and-seek." They are the "hiders"; and, as their lives often depend
on their skill in hiding, you cannot wonder that they know every trick
in the game.

There may be crabs, fish, shrimps, and others in the pool. If you look
for a moment, and then walk to the next pool, your hunting will not have
much result. It is best to lie down and wait patiently, gazing into the
clear water of the pool. The little inhabitants are hidden in the dark
corners under the rock ledges, or buried under stones and sand; or they
may be hiding in those thick clumps of mussels--a favourite
lurking-place; or else tucked away in the friendly shelter of the
seaweed.

Knowing their dodges, you will soon become clever at finding them. Some
seaside dwellers, such as prawns, are almost transparent in the water.
Others, like baby crabs, are green or brown like the weed in which they
hide. Even the sharp eyes of the seagulls must be deceived by this
trick.

What a strange life they lead, these creatures of the shore! At times
they are deep under water, and they form part of the teeming life of the
ocean floor.

Then the tide falls and uncovers them. They are in the full light of day
again, the sun shines on them. Most of them cannot escape to the sea,
and so must face the enemies which prowl along the shore looking for
prey. So, from one tide to the next, the rock-pool is like a prison
containing prisoners of the strangest sort.

[Illustration: GULLS. 1. COMMON GULLS. 2. LESSER BLACK GULL. 3. GLAUCOUS
GULLS.]


EXERCISES

1. How is the sand formed?

2. Give the names of some of the animals to be found in the rock-pools.

3. Where do these animals hide?

4. Prawns and shore-crabs are not easily seen; why is this?




LESSON III.


BIRDS OF THE SHORE.

On some parts of our coast we find steep cliffs, with the sea beating
wildly at their feet. Elsewhere there is a sloping beach of sand and
shingle with, perhaps, dark rocks showing at low tide. We explored such
a beach as that in our last lesson. There are long, long stretches of
sand and thin grass in other places, or else mile after mile of muddy,
dreary, salt marshes.

Birds are to be found on every kind of coast. Some, like the Seagull,
wander far and wide. Others keep to the cliffs, and many find all they
need in the wide mud-flats. Such an army is there of these shore birds,
that we cannot even glance at them all in this lesson. So we will take a
few of them only--the Black-headed Gull, the Cormorant, the Ringed
Plover, the Oyster-catcher and the Redshank.

Out of all the many kinds of Gulls, you know the Black-headed one best.
If you live in London you can see and hear him, for he and his cousins
have swarmed along the Thames of late years. They find food there, and
kind people enjoy feeding the screaming birds as they wheel in graceful
flight over the bridges and Embankment.

The country boy, too, sees this Gull. He flies far inland, following the
plough, and he then rids the land of many a harmful grub. Because of
this habit, some people call him the Sea-crow. At all seaside places you
find him, and there he fights for his meals with the Herring Gull, the
Common Gull, the Kittiwake and others.

Really we should call this gull the Brown-headed, not the Black-headed,
Gull; for the hood is more brown than black; and again, if you look for
this bird during your summer holidays, you will see no dark hood on his
head. You might, though, know him then by the red legs and bill, and the
white front-edging to his lovely pearly-grey wings.

Look at him in January, however, and you see dark feathers beginning to
appear on his head. The fact is, this dark hood is the bird's wedding
dress. It comes only when the nesting season draws near. Then he leaves
the fields, parks, and rivers, to fly away to the nesting-place.

These Gulls love to nest in colonies--that is, near one another. Among
rushes and reeds, and rough grass growing in deep wet mud, they feel
that their nests are safe. There they lay three eggs. The chicks, almost
as soon as they leave the eggs, can run about. If there is no dry land
near the nest, these youngsters tumble in the water and swim without
bothering about swimming lessons.

In summer they are ready to fly with their parents round the coast, and
to the muddy mouths of large rivers, where they feed. Flocks of them are
also seen out in the open sea, feeding on the shoals of small fish. They
also follow steamers, for the sake of any scraps thrown overboard, and
they crowd round the fishing boats when they are being unloaded. You
see, they are _scavengers_, and so are to be found wherever there are
waste scraps of food.

Perhaps you have noticed that Gulls float high in the sea, like so many
corks. They can leave the water easily, and take to flight; but they
_cannot_ dive. The Gull's dinner-table is the whole coast. His eyes are
keen enough, as you will know if you have watched him swoop down on a
piece of bread in mid-air, and catch it neatly in his beak.

The flight of this Gull is beautiful, graceful, and easy. Sometimes he
wheels up and up into the blue sky, almost without moving a wing. He can
also glide for a great while, balancing his body against the wind, and
turning his head from side to side on the look-out for food. Those long,
pointed wings of his make him one of Nature's most perfect
flying-machines. His wild, laughing cry has given him the nickname of
Laughing Gull.

In the fields and along the banks of our big rivers you may see the
Common Gull with numbers of his black-headed cousins. His beak and legs
and webbed feet are greenish yellow, and this is quite enough to
distinguish the two birds. Their habits are much the same. Both skim
over the sea, or the coast, looking for waste food. They are not very
"choice" in their meals; dead fish or live fish, young crabs, worms,
shell-fish or grubs they eat readily, as well as any offal thrown from
passing ships, or the refuse of the fish-market.

One of these scavenging birds was seen to be carrying a long object,
like an eel, in its mouth. The bird was shot; and it was then discovered
that the "eel" was really a string of candles! The greedy Gull had
half-swallowed one, leaving the rest to hang down from its bill. The
Common Gull nests in "colonies," like the Black-headed Gull. Its nest is
made of seaweed, heather, and dried grass, in which it lays its three
greenish-brown eggs.

Another bird to be seen along all parts of our coast, summer and winter
alike, is the Cormorant, usually with a small party of his friends. They
fly swiftly, one behind the other, and a long line of them reminds one
of the pictures of "sea-serpents," especially as they fly quite near the
surface of the sea, each one with its long neck outstretched. The Gull
flies beautifully, as if he knew his power, and loved to show how he can
skim and dive through the air. The Cormorant is not a flier, but a
swimmer and diver; he cannot "show off" in the air, and only uses his
narrow wings to take him, as quickly as may be, from one fishing-place
to another.

Most of the Cormorant's time is spent in fishing, for he lives entirely
on fish, and catches immense numbers of them. He spends many hours, too,
in drying his wings. I once saw a number of these birds with their wings
"hung out to dry." Each one was perched on a stump of wood, across the
muddy mouth of a river, and each sooty-looking bird had his wings wide
open in the sun. This habit seems to show that the Cormorant uses his
wings, as well as his feet, in his frequent journeys under water.

The powerful webbed feet of the Cormorant, set far back on the body, the
darting head, long neck, and long curved beak, tell you plainly how he
earns his meals. He is a clever fish-hunter, and the fishermen, knowing
the appetite of this keen rival of theirs, detest him and destroy him.
In some countries there is a price on his head--that is, so much money
is given for every Cormorant killed.

Sometimes the Cormorant swims slowly along with his head under water, on
the watch for small fish. Seeing one below him, he dives like a flash,
and can remain under water for some time; he wastes very little time,
however, in swallowing his victim head first.

The great skill of this bird has been made use of, and tame Cormorants
are used in China to obtain fish for their masters. They have been used
in England, too, for the same purpose. A strap is placed round the
bird's neck to prevent him from swallowing the catch. He is then set to
work. After catching five or six fish he is recalled by his master, and
made to disgorge his prey, which, of course, he has swallowed as far as
the strap will permit.

The Cormorant is famous for his large appetite; he chases even big fish,
of a size to choke him, you would think. Like his relative the Pelican,
he owns a very elastic throat. I have seen a Pelican put a half-grown
duck in its pouch, without much trouble. The Cormorant could not perform
this feat, but his throat will stretch so as to allow the passage of
large fish. Small fish he usually tosses up in the air, catches them
neatly head first, and swallows them whole.

Another bird of our coast is the Oyster-catcher, sometimes called the
"Sea-pie" or Mussel-picker. These names suit it well, for it does not
live on oysters, but on mussels, limpets and whelks. Of course, these
are easily "caught" at low tide; they are not easily eaten, so the
Sea-pie has to earn his dinner by hard work. In fact, his beak is often
notched by the sharp, hard edges of the shells of these molluscs; and at
times, he haunts the low banks of mud and ooze near the sea, and there
picks up worms and other soft-bodied animals.

As his name Sea-pie shows, the Oyster-catcher is a black-and-white bird,
his under parts being white and upper parts black. His legs and long,
straight bill are red. Most birds of the waterside seem to find that
black-and-white feathers make a good disguise. Though they would show up
plainly on a green field, they are well hidden among the stones along
the edge of the water.

The Sea-pie makes no nest, only a hole in the sand or shingle, lined
with small stones or shells. The eggs are coloured and marked so that
they are hard to see among the stones which surround them. The
youngsters wear a fluffy suit of grey, marked with dark streaks and
dots; and it takes very sharp eyes indeed to pick them out from the
shingle where they crouch.

The Ringed Plover is another bird which loves the sandy, pebbly margin
of the sea. Have you ever watched him there? He is not much larger than
a plump lark, and he runs quickly along the beach, stooping now and
again to pick up the morsels of food which his keen eye detects.

But, all the while, he is watching you with the other eye, for he is a
wary little bird, and not to be taken by surprise. _If_ you can get near
him, you will notice his rather long yellowish legs, greyish-brown back,
and, more than all, the white collar round his neck, and the black band
showing on his white chest. Again we see the black-and-white markings
which are so useful to the bird of the shore.

Everyone who knows the Ringed Plover loves to watch him. He is one of
the daintiest, most fairy-like birds. When he is picking up worms and
sand-hoppers on the wet sand he is easily observed. But wait! He flies
off and settles on the shingle not far away. You walk nearer, to watch
him. Alas! he is gone. You know just where he settled, yet he is gone!
He has often played that trick on me.

The secret lies in his grey, white-and-black markings. When our ships
were in danger from enemy submarines, our sailors painted them with
queer stripes and bars, to make it hard for the enemy to see them.
Nature has marked the Ringed Plover on the same plan. The feathers are
so coloured and the colours are so arranged that, once among the grey,
yellow, black, and white pebbles on the beach, the little bird is
invisible. It is as if the earth had swallowed him up.

The eggs, too, are just as hard to find. There is no nest to "give the
game away"; and the eggs look just like the pebbles amongst which they
are laid. The young ones are protected from their enemies in the same
way, and they crouch, as still as death, amid the stones which they so
much resemble.

Now let us leave the beach and look for the Redshank on the mud-flats.
Many birds would starve there, but the Redshank is quite happy, as
Nature has fitted him for his life in such a place. His long, red
legs--from which he gets his name--are for wading in the shallow, muddy
creeks he loves. Those wide-spreading feet keep him from sinking in the
mud.

The long beak is for probing. As a rule the Redshank digs for his
dinner, though he also picks up any worms or other food on the surface;
but he is nearly always seen probing the mud.

Like all the shore birds, Redshanks are very wary. They have no hedges
or trees for hiding-places, and so must always be on the watch. No
sooner does the Redshank spy you than he is up and, with a shrill
whistle of alarm, flies quickly away.

The marshes are the home of many a bird like the Redshank. They are all
waders and diggers. They live much as he does, and so they have the long
beak and legs, and the spreading feet, to fit them for that life.

We have now looked at a few sea birds, shore birds, and a marsh bird.
Many inland birds, too, are fond of the shore. The artful Jackdaw builds
in the cliffs, and his cousin, the Crow, searches the shore for food.
Even the gay Kingfisher has been seen diving in the seaside pools.


EXERCISES

1. How do you know which is the Black-headed Gull in the summer months?

2. Why is it difficult to see the Ringed Plover on the stones of the
shore?

3. Where would you look for the eggs of the Ringed Plover and of the
Black-headed Gull?

4. Why have marsh birds such long beaks?




LESSON IV.


CRABS.

Little Crabs are to be found everywhere along the sea-shore--not the
monsters of the fishmonger's shop, but small greenish-brownish Crabs.
They live in the weed of the rock-pools, and in the wet sand. These are
the Shore Crabs; the large Edible Crabs are a different kind, and live
mostly in deep water.

Shore Crabs are quarrelsome little creatures; the larger ones are always
ready to gobble up the smaller ones, or to snatch their food and run
away with it. If you put some dead mussels or fish in a pool, you will
be amused at their antics. How they scramble and fight! Crabs do not
believe in "table manners."

[Illustration: THE REDSHANK.]

[Illustration: THE CRAB.]

It is their taste for waste scraps of food that makes crabs of use in
the sea. They are most useful scavengers. They clear the sea and beach
of dead matter which would poison the air and water.

For many years nobody knew how Crabs grew up. It was thought that a baby
Crab was like its mother, just as a baby spider is a tiny picture of its
parent. But no, the young Crab is as much _like_ a Crab as a caterpillar
is like a butterfly.

Let us begin at the beginning--the egg. Mother Crab carries her eggs
with her, under her tail, which itself is always kept tucked up under
her body. Out of each egg there comes the queerest little creature! It
is just large enough to be seen as it wriggles in the water. Then its
skin splits, and there appears a quaint thing with long feathery legs, a
big head, a spike on the back of its head, and another spike like a
nose.

Who would suspect this strange atom would turn into a Crab! Well, nobody
did. It was called a _zoea_; but you can call it a Crab caterpillar or
larva. The maggot is the larva of the fly, and the zoea is the larva of
the Crab. With crowds of its brothers and sisters, the zoea kicks about
on the surface of the sea. Fishes, and even great whales, swallow these
tiny things by the million.

The Crab larva eats and grows. Again and again its skin splits, and a
rather different zoea appears. This happens about once a week, until,
hey presto! the spiked zoea is now rather like a Crab. The spikes are
gone, and now it has tiny claws, and two eyes at the end of stalks. Yet
it still owns a tail. At last this is tucked up under its body, and lo!
our little friend has changed into a very small Crab. No longer able to
swim about, it comes to get a living in the shallow pools of the shore.

Luckily, this helpless baby knows how to hide. He is helped by his
colour, for it matches the green and brown of the weeds and rocks. He
knows how to dig himself into the sand, and work his shell well down.
Then only his funny eyes on stalks peer up at you. At this time of his
life he has to "make himself scarce," and snatch his food when and where
he can.

[Illustration: PURSE CRAB.]

We do not eat these little Crabs, but other Crabs do, and so do
anemones, gulls, and other hungry creatures; and they themselves hunt
sand-hoppers, and eat anything they can find or steal. So they grow
bigger; and then, like the boy who grows quickly, the Crab finds his
shelly suit a size too small for him!

Now look at his suit. It is a hard coat, a complete suit of armour to
protect his soft body. Our picture shows the Lobster, the Crab's cousin.
The Shrimp and Prawn and Lobster are relations of the Crab; these
_crustaceans_, as they are called, are all cased up in a hard _crust_,
which will not stretch the slightest little bit. But the Crab's body
_must_ grow! What is he to do?

At first he starves himself, and so his body shrinks inside its old
shell. He loosens himself as well as he can. Soon the shell breaks
across, and the Crab struggles to get free. At last he backs out, and
leaves his old suit for ever. It is a wonderful performance, for he has
withdrawn even from the legs, claws, feelers, bristles, eye-stalks and
eyes! The old shell is left quite whole--a perfect Crab, but with no
Crab inside it!

Now the Crab, in his new suit, hides away. He knows that he is a soft,
flabby creature at this time, and that other animals, even Mrs. Crab,
would be glad to meet him--and eat him. While his covering is yet soft
he grows quickly. When it is hard, he ventures out again, ready to
quarrel and fight.

This change of shell happens often to young Crabs. Older ones change
only once a year. All the different kinds of Crab begin life as _larvae_
or _zoeas_, and cast their shells as we have seen.

Crabs can see and hear and smell; and they must also have a fine sense
of touch. I was once watching a big Crab eating his dinner under a rocky
ledge in a large glass tank. As he tore his food, some of the bits, no
larger than crumbs, fell and settled on the rocks below. Then I saw that
a smaller Crab, with long pincers, was hiding under a rock. As the
crumbs fell, he reached out his pincers and picked them up, one by one.
Each bit was gravely carried to his mouth, and tucked in, and then he
reached out for another. Though I was very close to the Crab, I could
hardly see the tiny scraps which he was able to pick up so easily.

One of the strangest Crabs is the Hermit. You would think that Nature
had played a joke on him, for he has only half a suit of armour. His
tail part is soft. He would have a bad time in the sea, but for a dodge
he has learnt.

The baby Hermit takes the empty home of a periwinkle. As he grows he
needs a larger house, and so leaves the tight shell and pops his tail
into a bigger one, generally a whelk shell. If he meets with another
Hermit there is a battle, one trying to steal the other's shell. Our
coloured picture, page 35, shows some Hermits at war. Fighting,
house-hunting, and moving house seem to be the Hermit's favourite
pursuits. But, whatever he does, his first care is to protect that soft
tail of his. His right claw is large and strong, so he uses it to close
the door of his stolen home.

Sometimes he has a lodger who lives on the roof. This lodger, as you
will notice in our coloured picture, is the sea anemone. The Hermit and
his lodger seem to be good friends, at least they seem to like each
other's company. There is no doubt that there are good reasons for this.
We shall have more to say about this strange pair in our lesson on the
sea anemones.

[Illustration: HERMIT CRAB IN WHELK'S SHELL.]

Another funny Crab is the Spider Crab. Its back is covered with reddish
bristles, like so many hooks. These catch in the seaweed, and soon the
Spider Crab is decorated with bits of weed. But that is not all. The
artful Crab tears off other pieces of weed with its pincers, and
attaches them to the hooks. It is another dodge, of course, to escape
from enemies. The Lobster, whose picture you see, has a life-story much
like that of the Crab. He, also, grows too big for his suit of armour,
and casts it off in a wonderful manner, but only after a great deal of
trouble. In his new suit he is very weak and soft--an easy prey to the
first enemy to find him. He cannot defend himself then; he can only lie
helplessly on his side, waiting for his coat to harden. He is so weak
that his soft legs cannot bear the weight of his body.

[Illustration: HERMIT CRABS FIGHTING.]

Needless to say, the Lobster always finds a secure retreat before
casting off his protecting coat of armour. A hole under a rock suits him
well at that time. Strange to say, he seems to dislike his old clothes,
and often crunches them to pieces or eats them up, or even pushes them
under the sand or stones! Then he marches out like a proud warrior,
knowing his strength, and the power of his great claws.

Lobsters are fond of fighting, and must be very disagreeable neighbours.
They can swim along by using the little "swimmerets" under their bodies.
Or, by rapidly bending down their powerful tails, Lobsters are able to
shoot backwards through the water at a great pace. In our next lesson we
shall find that Prawns are also able to paddle forwards or dart
backwards in a similar way.

Lobsters, living and dead, are often on sale in the fishmonger's shop.
Like the Crabs and Prawns, they are usually caught in traps or pots,
baited with pieces of fish, and left among the rocks. The traps are of
various shapes, some being like bee-hives made of cane or wicker; others
are made of netting stretched over hoops, and more like a bird-cage in
shape.

The Lobster smells the bait in the trap, and hastens to get to it by
diving through the only entrance. Having enjoyed his meal he tries to
swim away; but there is no escape, and there he must wait until the
owner of the trap makes his usual "round" in the morning. Of course,
there is a rope to every trap, and a cork to mark its position.

[Illustration: HERMIT CRAB WITH SEA FLOWERS.]

Then the Lobster finds himself taken carefully out of prison; his claws
are tied to prevent him from fighting, and he goes to market with a lot
of other Lobsters. There are many lobster fisheries along the rocky
parts of our coast.

[Illustration: HERMIT CRAB WITH SEA FLOWERS.]

You will often see Lobsters with one very large claw, and one small.
They are able to throw off a limb or two whenever they are frightened.
Also they often lose a claw in the terrible fights of which they seem so
fond. If one joint of a claw becomes injured the Lobster has no further
use for it; he is wise, for his very life depends on his armour. So he
throws it away, not at the wounded joint, but at the joint above.

After a time a slight swelling appears on the stump thus made; this
gradually grows into a new limb. It may be smaller than the lost one,
but it is perfect in detail. What a useful gift this must be to an
animal like the Lobster, whose whole life is one terrible fight after
another!

The baby Lobsters, like the baby Crabs, are quite unlike their parents.
They swim about at the surface of the sea, and already they seize every
chance of fighting and eating their small neighbours.

When about one inch in length they leave this infants' school, and join
another at the bottom of the sea. Here they eat, fight, grow and change
their coats, just as the young Crabs do. They are now like their
parents. Sometimes they grow to be huge, and to weigh as much as
ten-and-a-half pounds.

The mother Lobster carries as many as thirty thousand eggs under her
body! Needless to say, a very, very few of this enormous family survive
the dangers of the sea. The rule there is--"Eat and be eaten!".


EXERCISES

1. What is a Crab larva like?

2. Give the names of four crustaceans.

3. Why does the Crab have to change its shell?

4. Why does it hide away at that time?

5. Of what use are Shore Crabs?

6. How are Lobsters caught?

[Illustration: THE LOBSTER.]




LESSON V.


SHRIM